Negotiating the Data Deluge on
YouTube: Practices of Knowledge
Appropriation and Articulated
Ambiguity Around Visual Scenarios of
Sea-Level Rise Futures
Simon David Hirsbrunner*
Human-Centered Computing Research Group, Institute for Computer Science, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany
The present study aims at evaluating how YouTube users understand, negotiate and
appropriate science-related knowledge on YouTube. It is informed by the qualitative
analysis of post-video discussions around visual scenarios of sea-level rise (SLR) triggered
by climate change. On the one hand, the SLR maps have an exemplary status as
contemporary
visualizations
of
climate
change
risks,
beyond
traditional
image
categories such as scientiﬁc or popular imagery. YouTube, on the other hand, is a
convenient media environment to investigate the situated appropriation of such visual
knowledge, considering its increasing relevance as a navigational platform to provide,
search, consume and debate science-related information. The paper draws on media
practice theory and operationalizes digital methods and qualitative coding informed by
Grounded Theory. It characterizes a number of communicative practices of articulated
knowledge appropriation regarding climate knowledge. This includes “locating impacts,”
“demanding representation,” “envisioning further,” “debating future action,” “relativizing
the information,” “challenging the reality of anthropogenic climate change,” “embedding
popular narratives,” “attributing to politics,” and “insulting others.” The article then
discusses broader questions posed by the comments and related to the appropriation
and discursive negotiation of knowledge within online video-sharing platforms. Ambiguity
is identiﬁed as a major feature within the practice of science-related information retrieval
and knowledge appropriation on YouTube. This consideration then serves as an
opportunity
to
reconsider
the
relationship
between
information
credibility
and
knowledge appropriation in the age of the digital. Findings suggest that ambiguity of
information can have a positive impact on problem deﬁnition, future imagination and the
discursive negotiation of climate change.
Keywords: online media, science communication, climate change, qualitative method, visual media, YouTube,
environmental communication, futures
Edited by:
Joachim Allgaier,
Fulda University of Applied Sciences,
Germany
Reviewed by:
Alberto Brodesco,
University of Trento, Italy
Dorothea Born,
University of Vienna, Austria
*Correspondence:
Simon David Hirsbrunner
simon.hirsbrunner@fu-berlin.de
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Science and Environmental
Communication,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Communication
Received: 01 October 2020
Accepted: 08 January 2021
Published: 05 February 2021
Citation:
Hirsbrunner SD (2021) Negotiating the
Data Deluge on YouTube: Practices of
Knowledge Appropriation and
Articulated Ambiguity Around Visual
Scenarios of Sea-Level Rise Futures.
Front. Commun. 6:613167.
doi: 10.3389/fcomm.2021.613167
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
February 2021 | Volume 6 | Article 613167
1
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 05 February 2021
doi: 10.3389/fcomm.2021.613167


INTRODUCTION
“Images are made and used in all sorts of ways by different people
for different reasons, and these makings and uses are crucial to
the meanings an image carries”
(Gillian Rose, 2001, 14).
Images have played a crucial role in mediating scientiﬁc
knowledge between various publics. They have helped to think
about complex issues and negotiate meaning from abstract
categories such as numbers and concepts for a long time. This is
particularly true for the issue of climate change, with its perceived
abstractness, invisibility, and futurity (Doyle 2009, 2011; Manzo
2009; 2010; O’Neill and Nicholson-Cole 2009; O’Neill and Smith
2014). The iconography of climate change can be described as a
competition between two families of pictures–those trying to grasp
the global, complex and virtual of environmental change, and those
focusing on the local, concrete, vulnerable and personal. Proponents
of the ﬁrst type of images mainly take the form of charts and maps
representing scientiﬁc results, particularly data outputs from
computer simulations. Some of these data visualizations have
frequently
made
it
into
the
news,
international
policy
negotiations, and other spheres of public debate. Examples, which
have also been discussed from the perspectives of various academic
disciplines, include the “hockey stick” (Montford 2010; Walsh 2014),
the “burning worlds” (Schneider 2012; 2016; 2017) and the “burning
embers” (Mahony and Hulme 2012). The second heterogenous class
of images tried for a long time to balance out the shortcomings of
these diagrammatic devices, which were often perceived as
distancing and failing to mobilize people to care more about the
climate and its changes. As an antidote, the public was ﬂooded with
motives of polar bears, vulnerable landscapes, individuals affected,
technological solutions and empowered communities. Movies such
as Al Gore’s An Inconvenient Truth have tried to combine the
beneﬁts of different image types by featuring both techno-scientiﬁc
projections of possible futures, local snapshots of past experiences
and offers for an engaging present.
Another visual strategy with the similar objective–to inform,
affect and engage at the same time–was to make computer-driven
visualizations more concrete, tangible and germane to relevant
publics (Sheppard et al., 2011; Sheppard 2012; Gurevitch 2014).
This development has received a particular boost in recent years
due to signiﬁcant advances in visualization software and
technology, as well as extensive development and access
possibilities for open (climate) data. A popular example of
such “affective” data visualizations are mappings of climate-
related ﬂood risks and sea-level rise (SLR), which built the
cornerstone of the present study. Some of these visual devices
can aptly be referred to as data visualizations, mostly representing
ﬂood risk as blue (water) or red (risk) layer on a cartographic
map. Others may be characterized as dynamic animations, vividly
depicting ﬂooding often in three-dimensional, hyperrealistic
landscapes. Their visual “genre” cannot be deﬁnitively set–they
both incorporate characteristics of scientiﬁc, technical imagery, as
well as narrative and aesthetic strategies of popular media.
In parallel to technological innovations, the social practices
relating computer-generated data imagery and their publics have
also changed in recent years. Many people have acquired
considerable skills to explore, analyze, understand, describe, and
debate data images as representations of scientiﬁc facts and artifacts
(Gray et al., 2016). Visualizations of climate-related data are at the
forefront of this development–they have pedagogic devices in
educational settings (Blumenthal et al., 2016), experimental
devices in Climate Hackatons (Haarstad et al., 2018) and
discursive devices for climate debates on social media platforms
(Hopke and Hestres 2018; Wang et al., 2018). Put otherwise, data
images have become crucial boundary objects (Star and Griesemer
1989) enabling the negotiation of climate change across social
worlds (Hirsbrunner, in press). Social media platforms have
recently become preferential places to host such visual boundary
objects and discursive negotiations of scientiﬁc and environmental
matters. YouTube, for example, includes thousands of videos and
discussions addressing the many facets of climate-related issues.
The platform now owned by Alphabet has become an important
source for many people who seek information about science-related
issues (Medienpädagogischer Forschungsverbund Südwest, 2015;
Forum; Wissenschaftskommunikation, 2016) and particularly
about climate change (Allgaier 2019).
Despite this dominant role of the platform for climate
knowledge appropriation, there has not been much research on
this topic yet. Existing studies on climate-related content and post-
video discussions on YouTube have mainly focused on the aspects
of political deliberation, controversy and the positioning of content
and comments within existing discourses on climate change. For
example, Shapiro and Han. (2018) have shown that post-video
discussions about climate change are typically driven by few
individuals actively campaigning for or against climate change-
related action. According to the authors, this dominance of elite
campaigners
limits
the
deliberative
opportunities
for
new
discussants and ideas to enter the debates (Shapiro and Han,
2018,
116).
Similarly,
Uldam
and
Askanius.
(2013)
have
analyzed
YouTube
user
debates
around
COP15
climate
conference in Copenhagen and evaluated the potential of the
platform
to
provide
a
communicative
space
for
citizens’
engagement in climate politics. They highlight the potential of
YouTube to act as a platform enabling the mobilization of activists
for the climate cause, but also show that political debates about
climate change on YouTube are often characterized by a hostile
ambience and tend to impede a true dialogue. These ﬁndings are
conﬁrmed by Jana Tereick’s analysis (2013) of the “climate lie”
topos in German post-video debates. Tereick observes the
formation of two group argumentations and identities, which
mainly deﬁne themselves in opposition to the other. Members
of one group are skeptical towards climate science and mass media
and depict the other group as docile followers of mainstream
positions. The other group is committed to the scientiﬁc consensus
on anthropogenic climate change and defames members of the ﬁrst
group as reactionaries and conspiracy theorists. These identities are
so dominant in the discussions that the respective identity-
generating terminology is often assumed to be known and both
groups parody each other. For Tereick, the debates represent
“pseudo-dialogues” enabling users to react to mass media
contributions, without the conventional mass media actually
participating in the debate (Tereick 2013, 249 f).
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
February 2021 | Volume 6 | Article 613167
2
Hirsbrunner
Negotiating the Data Deluge


Compared to these characterizations of discursive practices in
post-video discussions, Joachim Allgaier (2019) takes a step back
and asks what users ﬁnd in the ﬁrst place when searching for
climate change-related issues on YouTube. To do so, he analyzes a
sample of 200 videos triggered by different search terms. For the
search terms “Climate,” “Climate Change,” “Climate Science,” and
“Global Warming,” the study ﬁnds that the absolute majority of
videos adhere to mainstream views based on the scientiﬁc
consensus
of
climate
change.
Many
of
these
videos
are
professionally produced TV news and documentaries. They
accurately represent scientiﬁc views on global warming and
often
highlight
the
serious
negative
consequences
of
anthropogenic climate change. In contrast, Allgaier also shows
that users searching for the terms “Geoengineering,” “Climate
Manipulation,”
“Climate
Hacking,”
“Climate
Engineering,”
“Climate Modiﬁcation,” and “Chemtrails” are led to videos that
challenge mainstream scientiﬁc positions on climate change,
including material covering conspiracy theories. Conspiracy
theorists have also managed to occupy space in more science-
related discourses as those about geo- and climate engineering.
According to Allgaier, this correlation between geoengineering and
chemtrails is more than a thematic overlap, but a strategic move by
conspiracy
theorists
to
distort
communication
mainstream
discursive spaces and to hijack and relabel new discursive
concepts such as “geoengineering” with their own ideas (idem, 10 f).
All studies mentioned above look at social media discussions with
an explicit climate lens. Similar to other studies evaluating the public
understanding and perception of global warming, the authors
analyze along a continuum between supportive (“believers”) and
dismissive (“deniers”) attitudes towards climate change. This
continuum is an important heuristic for the entire ﬁeld of climate
change communication, which can be illustrated by several seminal
studies covering these issues. For example, an inﬂuential audience
segmentation analysis from 2009 divided the United States-american
population into six segments with different attitudes towards
information on climate change: alarmed, concerned, cautious,
disengaged, doubtful and dismissive (Maibach et al., 2009). The
study has later been adapted to other (media) geographies such as
Germany (Metag et al., 2017). In the same year as Global Warming’s
Six Americas, media researcher Matthew Nisbet. (2009) published an
article characterizing rival framings of “scientiﬁc uncertainty” and
“climate crisis” in the reporting of climate change within mass media.
The study highlighted the importance of media frames for public
engagement, but also pointed at severe biases and misconceptions in
the media coverage of global warming in the United States. Insights
from these studies have helped to improve media reporting on
climate change and they have informed the work of climate change
communicators in the United States and elsewhere. Newer studies,
however, have also criticized the believer–denier continuum.
Namely, Corry and Jørgensen. (2015) argue that the continuum
is focuses too heavily on climate change as a scientiﬁc object and
around trust in associated scientiﬁc claims: “Critics of Kyoto-style
agreements are not necessarily “deniers” of AGW [anthropogenic
global warming], while on the other hand scientiﬁc evidence in itself
does not legitimate one particular set of climate policies” (idem, 172).
Put otherwise, the believer–denier continuum often reduces people’s
complex
attitudes
towards
global
warming
to
two
related
considerations:
ﬁrst,
do
people
believe
in
the
reality
of
anthropogenic climate change? Second, are they then ready to
take action or at least accept climate mitigation policies? Instead,
Corry and Jørgensen propose to move beyond the categories of
“believers” and “deniers” in order to re-politicize the policy debate
while depoliticizing the science debate. Along these lines, the present
study proposes to analyze debates around visualizations of sea-level
rise futures without employing an explicit “climate (change
communication) lens.” It is interested in the ways people
appropriate science-related knowledge on YouTube, without
necessarily ordering these practices of appropriation into a
believer–denial continuum about the reality of anthropogenic
climate change.
After stating the main research questions of the study
(Research Questions), the paper introduces media practice
theory
(Results),
digital
methods
(Ambiguity
in
Video
Content,
Comments
and
Media
Environment)
and
Grounded Theory-informed qualitative coding (Ambiguity in
Video Content, Comments and Media Environment) as the
theoretical and methodological underpinnings of the study.
Credibility and Appropriation discusses the two SLR videos
and post-video discussions as research material and presents a set
of communicative practices of knowledge appropriation as a
result of the analysis. Building on the characterization of these
practices,
Credibility
and
Appropriation
then
discusses
ambiguity as a major feature in the post-video discussions and
practices of knowledge appropriation. This ambiguity has
different facets and is related both to the informational,
narrative and esthetic qualities of the video material in
question and to the ways people deal with science-related
information in the “unedited public sphere” (Bimber and de
Zúñiga, 2020) of social media platforms. The paper ﬁnally makes
the case for ambiguity in climate change communication and
highlights its role in practices of future imagination and online
knowledge appropriation.
RESEARCH QUESTIONS
The research questions of the present study are the following:
• What strategies do users operationalize to make sense of the
video content, to appropriate the SLR mappings, and to
negotiate aspects of the scenarios among them?
• How can these communicative patterns be formalized as
distinct practices of articulated knowledge appropriation?
• What higher level issues relevant to online knowledge
appropriation can be inferred through the comparison of
these communicative practices?
THEORY: UNDERSTANDING MEDIA AS
PRACTICE
The study draws on media practice theory and a situated
understanding of media, as elaborated by authors such as Nick
Couldry. (2004), Erhard Schüttpelz. (2006), Tristan Thielmann
(Thielmann and Schüttpelz, 2013) and others (Dang-Anh et al.,
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
February 2021 | Volume 6 | Article 613167
3
Hirsbrunner
Negotiating the Data Deluge


2017). As Nick Couldry puts it, the approach theorizes media as
practice, rather than as text or production process: “What range of
practices are oriented to media and what is the role of media-
oriented practices in ordering other practices?” (Couldry, 2004,
25). How then, can we characterize these situated practices among
the commenting and debate of SLR scenarios on YouTube? In
comparable efforts to study online communication, authors have
referred to “discursive practices” (Dorne and Navarro, 2011;
Wrana, 2015), “material-discursive practices” (Orlikowski and
Scott, 2015), “digital practices” (Jones et al., 2015), and “media
practices” (Dang-Anh et al., 2017) of online communication.
While these conceptualizations have much in common, they
highlight different nuances, which are informed by the speciﬁc
empirical cases, research contexts or incorporation of theory.
Media
linguist
Jannis
Androutsopoulos
characterizes
online communicative interactions following the broadcasting
of media content as “mediatized practices of content-related
communication”1 (2016, 344). In his study, he speciﬁcally
discusses two cases of such practices: Online discussions on
Twitter following the broadcasting of the popular German TV
show Tatort, and debates on Facebook following the most recent
transmission of the major news program Tagesschau. Among
other things, the study shows how existing dynamics of mass
media reception are altered by new constellations of social media
engagement across platforms. While this oscillates with our
example of people discussing video content on YouTube, there
are some considerable differences between Androutsopoulos’
example and our material. On the one hand, the animated
SLR scenario videos have been produced speciﬁcally for
YouTube, and they are also consumed and debated by users
within the same platform. Accordingly, the affordances of the
YouTube platform will have their share in structuring the
practices of media consumption and content-discussion at
hand. On the other hand, these videos are thematically and
aesthetically more homogenous than the content discussed by
Androutsopoulos. (2016). It is, therefore, assumed that the
commenting practices can be attributed more directly to the
informational, narrative and esthetic speciﬁcity of the video
content–to visual scenarios of ﬂood and SLR in particular and
climate-related future imaginaries more generally.
Considering the science-related issues at hand and the strong
thematic focus of the videos and user comments, we can also
consider the comments as a practice of knowledge appropriation.
While
there
are
different
interpretations
of
the
term
“appropriation”, the latter is commonly understood as an
action aiming to bridge the distance between the appropriating
subject and the object to be appropriated (Faber, 2001, 29). As a
matter of fact, appropriation is not only informed by the video
content, but by other factors such as psychological and social
personality, the body of knowledge available and the speciﬁc
circumstances of media consumption. In the context of
commenting behavior on YouTube, appropriation is also
inﬂuenced by the affordances of the YouTube platform: This
includes the working of its search and recommendation
algorithms, and the affordances of the comments section. In
addition, appropriation may also include an ordering of the past
discussions and a positioning of one’s own comment within
this order.
It is important to highlight here that knowledge appropriation
is not to be understood as passive transfer of information, but as
an active process. This is true for knowledge appropriation in
general, but also speciﬁcally for the case of appropriation of media
content. As Ulmer and Bergmann. (1993) highlight, media users
rarely absorb media content in a passive way, but actively
appropriate and process it by thematizing, reconstructing and
discussing what they have experienced in conversation with
others (1993, 83). This demonstrates that appropriation is
more
than
just
sense-making.
While
the
latter
is
a
psychological category addressing the cognitive ordering of
information
encountered
into
matters
of
everyday
life,
appropriation should be considered as a social practice. By
commenting on the SLR videos on YouTube, users not only
articulate their personal understanding of the videos, but they
also position and negotiate meanings among themselves. They
not only absorb the information and articulate their elaborated
meaning of the videos, but also make their positioning digitally
accountable (see Thielmann, 2012). The latter does not only have
an impact on the social interactions themselves, but also allows
and conﬁgures new ways of scientiﬁc investigation.
METHODOLOGY: INVESTIGATING VISUAL
MEDIA AS PRACTICE
Compared to the rhetoric of the written and spoken word, the
semiotic language of visual media is often perceived as vague,
ambiguous and elusive (Eppler et al., 2008). On the one hand,
images carry a great deal of implicit meaning and interpretative
ﬂexibility, which is similarly true for maps (Harley, 1988;
Caquard and Cartwright, 2014), digital data images (Rose,
2015), and particularly the visualization of climate data
(Mahony and Hulme, 2012; Walsh, 2014; Schneider, 2017).
On the other hand, the meaning of an image strongly depends
on the situated use of images, its contextualization, and audience.
Against this background, many different ways exist to obtain an
understanding of visual media and to analyze and describe their
meaning, reception and negotiation by audiences. Gillian Rose.
(2016) discusses many of these approaches in her seminar book
on Visual Methodologies, including content analysis, semiology,
psychoanalysis,
discourse
analysis,
audience
interviewing,
ethnography, digital and other methods (including mixed
ones). Online media practices are a special case in this regard,
as they also come with the promise to make themselves effectively
accountable as digital traces of various kinds (Dang-Anh et al.,
2017, 24 f). One should not misinterpret digital traces as virtual
representations of social interaction and practice. Rather, digital
research methodologies must always be vigilant to spot the
distortions and situated production contexts of online social
data (Marres and Gerlitz, 2015; Schäfer and van Es, 2017;
Gerlitz and Rieder, 2018). Nonetheless, one can certainly make
digital traces productive for practice-oriented research, as has
1German original: “Praktiken der Anschlusskommunikation”
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
February 2021 | Volume 6 | Article 613167
4
Hirsbrunner
Negotiating the Data Deluge


been shown by investigative approaches such as technography
(Rammert and Schubert, 2006), webnography (Strübing, 2006),
and digital ethnography (Pink et al., 2015). Informed by these
approaches, the present study focusses on the relationships and
dynamics between visual artifacts, discursive user interactions,
and YouTube as an enabling and structuring media environment.
These connections are then used to carve out situated mediated
practices coping with the visual future scenarios presented in the
relevant videos. The characterization helps one to understand
broader concerns within online debates appropriating and
negotiating complex scientiﬁc problems, such as the challenge
of source attribution, genre fuzziness and articulated ambiguity.
Digital Methods and Tools
Within its techno-experimental setting, the study draws on the
digital methods approach, pushed forward by proponents of the
Digital Methods Initiative at the University of Amsterdam
(Rogers, 2013; 2015). Rather than referring solely to the use
of digital tools for analysis (instead of “analogue methods”),
“digital methods” in this reading designate a speciﬁc positioning
of how to understand such instruments and make them
productive for critical media analysis. The guiding idea is that
existing technological entities such as algorithms and APIs can
be repurposed as research devices to investigate the social
practices, technologies and politics of the platform economy
(Rogers, 2013, 1). The aim is not to use these tools as mere
instruments to extract web data representing certain social
realities. The idea is rather to critically assess the ways in
which digital technologies produce and reconﬁgure social
realities, and if and how culture can be studied through
digital data. Visual studies scholars like Gillian Rose have
critically
assessed
the
potential
of
digital
methods
(as
research
approach
associated
with
certain
tools)
to
be
productive for the analysis and description of digital imagery
(Rose, 2016). Considering that such approaches combining
digital methods with image analysis are still at an early stage
of development, this paper is also intended as a methodological
contribution to this perspective. The following tools and
applications have been operationalized for data extraction
and analysis within the present study:
YouTube Data Tools (YTDT)2 are a toolbox for extracting
data from the YouTube platform via the YouTube API3 version 3,
and some scraping functionalities built on top of it. The YTDT
provide a particularly convenient visual interface for social media
researchers to extract data from YouTube without the need to
engage directly with the API. After exploring and extracting
YouTube data via YTDT, the output can then be analyzed
using
other
software
packages.
The
“Video
Info
and
Comments”-module4 of YTDT has been especially used here
to extract user comments and associated identiﬁcation and
interaction data, (e.g. numeric identiﬁers, channel names, likes,
number of replies).
The analysis of the data has been carried out using Gephi and
Microsoft Excel. Gephi5 is an open source data visualization and
exploration software for all kinds of graphs and networks, which
is frequently used in the context of social network analysis. Some
of the data extracted with the YTDT is optimized for analysis with
Gephi, namely GDF-ﬁles6 enabling the visualization of video,
channel and user networks. However, Gephi also provides wide-
ranging possibilities to visualize, sort, ﬁlter and manipulate all
sorts of tabular data. In the present study, Gephi has been used to
explore the datasets and to visualize networks between videos,
channels and users. The spreadsheet and analysis tool Microsoft
Excel7 was used in the qualitative coding process (see next
paragraph) to analyze, label and categorize the user debates
linked to the two videos in question.
Qualitative Coding and Grounded Theory
Qualitative data coding is a common way to build and analyze
data in social science traditions such as sociology, anthropology
and psychology. It has been operationalized in various research
contexts, including social media analysis (Vieweg et al., 2010).
Generally speaking, coding refers to the process of assigning labels
or tags to research material to make it ﬁt for analysis and scientiﬁc
reasoning. Qualitative coding can equally be applied to highly
unstructured and varied material, (e.g. memos, images and video
in ethnographic studies) and relatively structured items, (e.g. the
datasets analyzed within the present study). The data labeled are
then used for theory development, which may again adhere to
more formal or informal procedural rules.
A formal and common set of approaches to theory
development based on qualitative coding is Grounded Theory
(GT). According to sociologist Kathy Charmaz, GT methods
“consist of systematic, yet ﬂexible guidelines for collecting
and analyzing qualitative data to construct theories from the
data themselves.” (Charmaz, 2006, 2) GT has ﬁrst been
conceptualized in 1967 by Glaser and Strauss. (1999) and has
been further developed and tailored to multiple ﬁelds, materials
and scientiﬁc disciplines. Analytical steps in GT-informed
studies are not carried out sequentially but happen rather in
parallel
throughout
the
research
process.
Nevertheless,
advocates of GT have proposed different coding procedures,
which also tend to build on each other. Firstly, research material
is annotated freely with labels in a process referred to as open or
initial coding, which is accompanied by constant comparison
and adaptation. On the one hand, such open or initial coding
should stick closely to the data and may be guided by questions
such as: “What are these data a study of?“, “What do the data
suggest and pronounce?“, “From whose point of view” and
“What theoretical category does this speciﬁc datum indicate?”
2https://tools.digitalmethods.net/netvizz/youtube/, last retrieved on September 1,
2020.
3https://developers.google.com/youtube/v3/, last retrieved on September 1, 2020.
4https://tools.digitalmethods.net/netvizz/youtube/mod_video_info.php, last retrieved
on September 1, 2020.
5https://gephi.org/, last retrieved on September 1, 2020.
6https://gephi.org/users/supported-graph-formats/gdf-format/, last retrieved on
September 1, 2020.
7https://www.microsoft.com/de-de/microsoft-365/excel, last retrieved on September 1,
2020.
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
February 2021 | Volume 6 | Article 613167
5
Hirsbrunner
Negotiating the Data Deluge


(Charmaz, 2006; Glaser, 1978; Glaser and Strauss, 1999) On the
other hand, what distinguishes GT-informed coding from other
labeling and categorizing activities is its focus on action. As
Charmaz suggests, one should “look closely at actions and, to
the degree possible, code data as actions” (Charmaz, 2006, 47).
Categories emanating from the open coding process are then
further reﬁned in focused coding, synthesizing and explaining
larger segments of data.8 Accordingly, GT researchers engage in
theoretical
sampling,
which
means
seeking
and
collecting
additional data to elaborate and reﬁne categories for the
emerging theory. Theoretical sampling is expected to be carried
further until no new properties emerge, a state referred to as
saturation. Furthermore, methodological strategies such as sorting,
diagramming, and integrating can help further in the theoretical
development of the analysis. The use of working with visual,
conceptual maps has proven particularly useful in this regard
(Clarke, 2003; Clarke et al., 2015). It should be noted here that
the
coding
procedures
towards
grounded
theory
are
not
understood as a strict formula to be followed step-by-step.
Rather, GT generally leaves a lot of freedom to the analyst to
decide whether and how the different modes of coding make sense
within the situated researcher context. GT in the context of this
study is, therefore, essentially a guiding heuristic highlighting the
simultaneity of different analytical procedures and an inductive
stance towards data inquiry and theory development.
RESULTS
This section designates the selection process for the empirical
material (5.1), describes the two selected videos (5.1.) and
identiﬁes a number of commenting practices within post-video
discussions (5.3).
Selection of Video Material and Post-video
Discussions
At ﬁrst, an exploratory study was carried out to identify what
YouTube users ﬁnd when they search for climate change-related
issues and particularly sea-level rise. Despite the opacity of
YouTube’s algorithms, we can make some statements about the
way people ﬁnd, consume and navigate such video content within
the platform. One major entry point for people to browse videos is
YouTube’s search function. The user types a certain word or phrase
into the search ﬁeld and receives a list of videos, By default, the
content is sorted by relevance, but it can also be shown by upload
date, view count or rating. The way the YouTube search algorithm
ranks results by relevance is complex and opaque. It calculates
relevance based on a mix of platform metrics such as semantic
similarity, likes, recentness and engagement. Search results may
also differ from interaction to interaction, depending upon a
person’s search history, location, and timing of retrieval. Social
media researchers have operationalized different strategies to
account
for
such
algorithmic
personalization.
A
common
approach is to create a research browser that has a clean search
history and doesn’t allow for cookies or similar tracking devices.
Alternatively, one can retrieve search results via YouTube’s
developer API–either directly in a computer terminal or using
dedicated interfaces like the YTDT. While APIs have their own
issues with bias in data retrieval (Pfeffer et al., 2018), they usually
provide better ways to deal with such distortions than analysis
within the end-user platform interfaces. In the context of the study,
the YTDT video list module9 was used to retrieve YouTube search
results for the queries “sea-level rise,‘”10 while balancing out
algorithmic variations using multiple iterations.
The analysis of the top ranked videos on SLR revealed a
number of characteristics: ﬁrst, videos with considerable debates
(number of user comments) also rank highest on “relevance.” As
shown elsewhere (Burgess and Green, 2018), YouTube speciﬁcally
values user generated content and debate, which is also reﬂected in its
search algorithm and related video feature. Second, a considerable
share of the top ranked videos were produced by US-based
popular science channels (RealLifeLore, Verge Science, The Daily
Conversation, Science Insider, Business Insider). This illustrates how
climate impacts have become a mainstream topic, which ﬁts popular
science formats promoted by media platforms such as YouTube.
Third, animated maps showing possible ﬂooding due to climate
change triggered SLR are a prominent visual format in the top
ranked results.
Considering aspects of representativeness and feasibility, two
videos were selected for further analysis within the study: “The
World After Sea-Level Rise” by Climate Central/The Daily
Conversation and “How Earth Would Look If All The Ice
Melted” by The National Geographic/Science Insider. Both
videos were 1) among the top10 search results for relevant
videos on SLR, 2) they triggered considerable user debates, 3)
they were featured by a popular-science channel and 4) they
adhered to the prominent esthetic genre, namely animated maps.
Analysis of the Video Material
Video 1: The World After Sea-Level Rise (Figure 1)11
The video depicts two- and three-dimensional views of ﬂooding
cities around the world, including London, New York, Rio de
Janeiro, Tokyo, Dubai and Hong Kong. The video is a showreel
8Some scholars using GT approaches carry out a third kind of categorization, axial
coding, where classes and hierarchies of codes are compared to deepen
understanding and help theory-development (Corbin and Strauss 1990, 16). In
other conceptualizations of GT, axial coding is only seen as a facultative step, which
may or may not be useful in a concrete research situation.
9The module retrieves “related videos” from the search/list#relatedToVideoId API
endpoint. Developer website on the YouTube API, available at https://developers-
dot-devsite-v2-prod.appspot.com/youtube/v3/docs/search/list#relatedToVideoId
10The author also experimented with alternative spellings (sea level rise, sealevel
rise), but these variations did not lead to different search results. In contrast, search
results differ considerably when the term is translated into other languages
(“Meeresspiegelanstieg” in German, ‘élévation du niveau de la mer’ in French,
“subida del nivel del mar” in Spanish). The analysis in the present study has been
limited to videos with English titles, narration and (most) comments.
11Link to video 1 on YouTube: https://youtu.be/xE0KtLy5j8w (last retrieved on 30
Sept 2020). Acknowledgments stated on YouTube: Clips courtesy of Climate
Central, video edited by Robin West and produced by Bryce Plank.
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
February 2021 | Volume 6 | Article 613167
6
Hirsbrunner
Negotiating the Data Deluge


of the online maps produced by the United States-based non-
governmental organization Climate Central. Its SLR program
Surging Seas is structured around a series of dynamic mappings
of SLR and ﬂood risks, which are presented in multiple visual
formats, positioned into various discourses of public debate and
disseminated
throughout
numerous
media
channels.
The
underlying data, elevation models, SLR projections and aesthetics
of the maps have been updated several times since the start of the
program in 2012, acknowledging new scientiﬁc ﬁndings, and better
data and mapping technology.12 Most views of the video were
generated with the mapping software Google Earth Engine, which
made it possible to render the ﬂooding projections as overwhelming
sceneries in three dimensions. The video designates two alternative
scenarios of SLR, one with two degrees and one with four degrees of
global warming. On the date of data retrieval (June 2, 2020), the item
had had 239,715 views, 1,800 likes13 and 614 comments. The video
was published on January 24, 2017, by The Daily Conversation, a
popular YouTube channel (865 M subscribers by June 2020)
featuring mini-documentaries about a variety of topics. Other
popular videos of the channel address topics such as China’s
Future MEGAPROJECTS (2019–2050s), Ebola: The Deadliest
Outbreak Explained, 10 Incredible 4K (Ultra HD) Videos, and
Future Military Robots Explained.
Video 2: How Earth Would Look If All The Ice Melted
Figure 214
Similar to video 1, the item depicts cartographic views of a future
with SLR. A globe is slowly turning and changing its shape–from
the present face of the earth into an undesignated future, where
many coastal areas are lost to the sea. The maps were produced
by the staff of the science newspaper National Geographic, based
on multiple research insights and open data resources.15 The
underlying projection is different from video 1 in the sense that
it shows a situation where the polar ice caps have melted
completely and the water has been absorbed by the oceans.
While video 1 shows two equally probable long-term scenarios
of SLR, the projection from video 2 may be characterized more
as a low probability high-risk scenario according to the current
state of science at the time of writing (summer 2020). From its
aesthetics, video 2 is more faithful to the conventions of two-
dimensional satellite cartography, with color shades of blue,
green, yellow and brown. In the course of the animation and the
ﬂooded future unfolding, a number of vulnerable cities are
designated by white points and name tags popping up before
being besieged by the blue of the rising waters. The video was
published on February 18, 2015 by Science Insider (1.4 M
subscribers by June 2020), a brand of the large news website
Business Insider16. On the date of data retrieval (June 2, 2020),
the video had had 18, 957, 824 views, 66,000 likes (averaged
value) and 25,949 comments.
Analysis of Post-Video Discussions
Open coding informed by grounded theory was carried out on
user comments posted under video 1. The sample includes all
comments posted between January 24, 2020 (publishing date of
the video) and November 16, 2019 with 600 comments in total.
The data contains original comments (N  336) and replies to
those comments (N  264). The comments were labeled as
distinctive actions, characterizing the articulated attitude of
users towards the media content and SLR scenarios depicted.
FIGURE 1 | The world after sea-level rise (© climate central/daily conversation).
12Today, the maps mostly build on open datasets provided by the United States-
American government agency NOAA (North American Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration). See https://coast.noaa.gov/digitalcoast/, last retrieved on June
3, 2020.
13Likes are represented as rounded values within the YouTube interface.
14Link to video 2 on YouTube: https://youtu.be/VbiRNT_gWUQ (last retrieved on
30 Sept 2020)
15Video produced by Alex Kuzoian, Science Insider. Acknowledgments for the
maps stated on the National Geographic website: Philippe Huybrechts, Vrije
Universiteit Brussel; Richard S. Williams, Jr, Woods Hole Research Center;
James C. Zachos, University of California, Santa Cruz; USGS; NOAA; ETOPO1
Bedrock, one arc minute Global Relief Model. Copyright: September 2013 National
Geographic Society.
16www.businessinsider.com, last retrieved on June 3, 2020.
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
February 2021 | Volume 6 | Article 613167
7
Hirsbrunner
Negotiating the Data Deluge


After the labeling and categorization of the user data linked to
video 1, a second video and user debate was identiﬁed for
theoretical sampling. Video 2 was chosen because of its high
designation of relevance for the SLR issue attributed by the
YouTube algorithms (top rankings for search results and
recommended videos17), due to its media-speciﬁc similarities
(information, narrative, aesthetics) to video 1, and its massive
number of user comments (more than 25,000 by the time of data
retrieval). The ﬁrst 600 comments were chosen as a sample for
category comparison, elaboration and reﬁnement. The data
analysis led to the identiﬁcation and characterization of
distinctive practices of articulated knowledge appropriation
related
to
visual
SLR
scenarios.
The
categories
include
“locating impacts,” “demanding representation,” “envisioning
further,”
“debating
future
action,”
“relativizing
the
information,” “embedding popular narratives,” “attributing to
politics,” “challenging the reality of anthropogenic climate
change,” and “insulting others”. Practices were included in this
typology provided that a share of ﬁve to twenty percent of
comments could be attributed to them. Moreover, in the case
of inferred practices representing more than twenty percent, it
has proven useful to split the category and use more differentiated
practices.18 It is important to note that comments are sometimes
attributed to more than one category and practice. Comments, for
example, may simultaneously imagine what will happen in the
future (“envisioning further”), mobilize for climate action
(“debating future action”), and play with irony (“relativizing
the information”).
Locating Impacts
The animated maps of both videos show geographic locations
ﬂooded by layers of blue water. Accordingly, an obvious practice
related to the imagery is to discuss what can be seen on the map.
A considerable share of the comments in both videos refer to the
locations, which will be ﬂooded according to the scenarios. Most
frequently in this category, users comment on the ﬂooding
depicted of their own living environment. A frequent practice
is to write “RIP” (rest in peace) or “Goodbye” and then refer to
the speciﬁc city: “Goodbye to my home in Bahrain(” (B016),
“RIP Florida(” (B026)The truthfulness, likeliness or accuracy of
the scenario depicted is not challenged or debated in these
comments. It is taken as it is and the articulated reception
works along with the dichotomy “ﬂooded” vs. “safe,” for
example, “Australia is covered by sea, but Melbourne is
totally safe” (A102).
Demanding Representation
A considerable number of users also complain about the places
left out: “Why did you leave out the African continent? or you
don’t really care whatever happens there?” (A073) As can be
illustrated
by
this
comment,
cartographic
representations
typically evoke debates about what is put on the map and
what is not, who is represented and who is not. While the
reasons for showing some places and leaving out others may
be attributed to speciﬁc conditions in map production, they
always have both a technical and political dimension. As I
have discussed elsewhere (Hirsbrunner, in press), the decision
to show a speciﬁc location or not is connected to factors such as
the availability of data, models and technology to produce the
maps: The SLR maps require high-dimensional elevation data,
which are expensive, technology-intensive and cumbersome to
produce. Elevation models can only be developed by highly
skilled experts in dedicated research institutions. Geographic
information tools, such as Google Earth Engine, can only
render dynamic three-dimensional landscapes (as in video 1),
where the overall data resolution is particularly high, (e.g.
metropolitan areas, industrialized countries). While this has
not been an intention of the map producers, video 1 especially
prevents people from vulnerable but less iconic places to make
connections to their own living environments. The comments
show
that
the
dichotomy
between
the
represented
and
unrepresented also translates to the comments section, where
debates are mostly conducted by the “mapped,” with a few
exceptions of users demanding representation.
Envisioning Further
Some users take the scenarios depicted as a starting point for their
own imaginations of a ﬂooded future. They go beyond the
dichotomies
between
ﬂooded
vs.
safe
and
mapped
vs.
unmapped in their comments and add to the imaginary using
their own words. Some of these personal visions are informed by
science-informed models and scenarios: “(. . .) Since the people
would have to move, cities would be more crowed. A lot of foreign
diseases would reach other places because of all the emigration.
People would starve because there would be less land for
agriculture. Lots of species would die because they lost their
home” (B192–01). However, many of the personal additions to
the scenarios depicted are not realistic and do not try to be so. As
one contributor writes: “We will have sharknado type water
spouts. A lot of people will be eaten by sharks. Orcas will
patrol the streets” (A001–09). However, some of these other
envisioning comments discuss the potential beneﬁts of the
scenario: “Good thing egypt [sic] will have more water so
more people can live in more places” (B124). Similar to
“demanding
representation,” “envisioning further” can
be
understood as a strategy of sense-making and appropriation of
the scenario by commentators. Independently of the likeliness of
the personalized scenarios described, “envisioning further” is
cognitive and articulative work, which proves that people have
processed the information depicted and linked it to their extant
body of knowledge. The act of selective perception (watch the
video, absorb the information) and the articulation of the
reception (commenting) should not be underestimated as a
17Relevance within search rankings was evaluated by using the “video network
module” of the YTDT, which taps the YouTube data API and its search/
list#relatedToVideoId
API
endpoint:
https://tools.digitalmethods.net/netvizz/
youtube/mod_videos_net.php. This procedure allows for relatively unbiased
output and evaluation of search results and recommended videos, which are
independent from cookie tracking and other personalization techniques in the web.
18This, for example, was the case with the preliminary category “localizing climate
impacts”, which was subsequently split into “locating impacts” (referring to
depicted locations on the map), “demanding representation” (referring to
locations not represented), and partially to “attributing to popular narratives”
(mentioning ﬁctional locations such as “Atlantis”).
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
February 2021 | Volume 6 | Article 613167
8
Hirsbrunner
Negotiating the Data Deluge


practice in a media environment such as YouTube, where
abundant content cries for attention.
Debating Future Action
Users also discuss ways to cope with a future life in the scenario
depicted and solutions for the climate crisis: Planting a lot and I
mean A LOT of trees is probably the cheapest, easiest way to clean
up the atmosphere after reducing emissions by swapping [sic] to
renewable energy, etc” (A004–02). The contributions address
both, strategies to mitigate climate change (“How can we stop
this from happening” A351)and adapt to it (“This is not good for
me. gotta sell my house in ho chi minh city.” B194). Similar to the
practices described so far, comments “debating future action” do
not challenge the plausibility of the scenario(s) depicted. As a
matter of fact, it is striking that comments “debating future
action” do not mostly refer to the speciﬁc consequences
depicted
in
the
scenario.
The
scenario
only
serves
as
motivation to debate decisions, engagements and coping
strategies more generally. Moreover, many comments gain an
important new dimension within this practice of appropriation.
They become attributable to the climate discourse, with all the
mobilization strategies, unwritten rules and positionings of this
debate.
Relativising the Information
Users often use non-literal language in their comments. This
includes the use of irony (“rising seas? just drink the water”
A008–09), sarcasm (“Who cares! I have a kayak, that I bought
from Walmart, who is part of global warming problem. But hey, it
was cheap!” A275) and cynicism (“I wouldn’t mind if humans got
extinct to be honest. I lost faith in humanity a while ago”
A014–03).
Using
nonliteral
language
in
digital
media
communication is a common practice, which may take the
form of speciﬁc expressions, ﬁgures of speech, and the use of
heavy punctuation and emojis (Whalen et al., 2009). Sarcasm
especially seems to have qualities as a rhetorical strategy to ﬁt the
debate of the informational content and scenarios at stake. As
Ashley Anderson and Heidi Huntington have highlighted in their
study of climate debates on Twitter, the use of sarcasm allows one
“to identify and appeal to like-minded others through the critique
of outsiders, while maintaining an appearance of civility through
plausible deniability” (Anderson and Huntington, 2017, 602). In
the case of the SLR maps, the commenters maintain and verbalize
a critical distance to the future scenario, without explicitly
challenging or discarding it. This sometimes also leads to
further discussions debating or resolving the speciﬁc tone of a
comment: “I am going to ignore the cynic in me and hope that
you’re joking” (A008–01).
Challenging the Reality of Anthropogenic Climate
Change
It is remarkable that the techno-scientiﬁc accuracy of the ﬂood
maps is rarely debated or challenged within the YouTube user
debates surrounding the videos. The only critique about the way
ﬂooding is depicted in the maps is the missing representation
discussed under above. Equally, issues such as likeliness,
probability or uncertainty literally play no role in the debates.
This is, despite the fact that these categories are crucial elements
of risk communication and are explicitly addressed in one of the
videos: Video 1 shows two different scenarios (two degrees vs.
four degrees of global warming), which are clearly labeled as such
in the animation. By contrast, a considerable segment of
comments challenges the climatological underpinnings of the
ﬂood scenarios: The melting of the polar ice caps, and the reality
of anthropogenic climate change. Commenters claim, for
instance, that “(. . .) The planet earth is getting COOLER, not
warmer” (A137) and announce that “Global warming is the
biggest hoax ever” (A240). Such views are voiced by mainly
right-leaning, United States-based authors, who attribute the
videos and depicted scenarios to “left wing propaganda”
(A219). The debates around the fact- and faithfulness of the
videos are especially vivid and potentially toxic (see also
“insulting others”).
Attributing to Politics
Twenty (video 1) to thirty percent (video 2) of the comments
make a reference to political debates beyond SLR or climate
change. The comments politicizing the imagery are distributed in
fairly equal shares in liberal and conservative positionings for
both videos.19 This fair share also indicates that the channels are
consumed by politically diverse audiences. On the one hand,
conservative voices dismiss and discredit the visual scenarios as
an element of unsound climate science or left-wing propaganda
(as in “challenging the underlying science”). The (only)
prominent ﬁgure often mentioned in these comments is
former presidential candidate and Vice President Al Gore:
“GIVE AL GORE MONEY TO SAVE THE EARTH AND HE
WILL TURN ON HIS SPECIAL AIR CONDITIONER [sic]”
(A195) On the other hand, liberal voices often refer to and
criticize President Donald Trump and his administration:
“This will happen if the idiot trump climate change denier
dont [sic] get impeached” (A003). Interestingly, these two
personiﬁcations are very stable, even if Al Gore is currently
out of the political picture and current elections. It can also be
debated whether making fun of President Donald Trump should
be considered as a (liberal) political statement. In some
comments, Trump serves more as a kind of pop ﬁgure, with
all the implications this has for (the characterization of) current
political debates. This tendency can be illustrated by the recurrent
theme in the comments to combine the consideration of SLR
futures with the debates around Trump’s plan of a United States-
Mexico-border wall (“We’re going to build a wall and the ocean is
going to pay for it!!!” A259).
One important speciﬁcity of the comments in the category
“attributing to politics” is that most users posting right-leaning
arguments are clearly of United States-descent, while critical
comments evoking president Trump are much more diverse
regarding user nationality.
19In the discussion section, this practice is therefore split into two categories,
“attributing to politics (left-leaning)” and “attributing to politics (right-leaning).”
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
February 2021 | Volume 6 | Article 613167
9
Hirsbrunner
Negotiating the Data Deluge


Embedding Popular Narratives
“Embedding
popular
narratives”
here
means
that
the
informational content and the aesthetics of the videos are
associated with existing popular stories, cultural themes and
narratives. Examples of the themes evoked are Abraham’s
deluge (bible) and Atlantis and Venice as different imaginaries
of ﬂooded cities. Some media works discussed are Blade Runner
(ﬁlm), Inconvenient Truth (ﬁlm) and Minecraft (computer
game). Comments evoking cultural narratives are also among
those triggering the most responses from others, including likes
and replies. The comment in video 1 with most likes is “and
Venice will be the next Atlantis” (A007–1) (148 likes), and in
video 2, “Noooo! Where is Atlantis:’ (.” (B001) is at rank three on
likes (72 likes). Other comments do not explicitly mention
speciﬁc
stories,
but
clearly
play
with
popular
narrative
elements. Similar to the practice of “envisioning further,”
“popularizing
the
imagery”
can
be
characterized
as
an
imaginative strategy to make sense of and appropriate techno-
scientiﬁcally complex scenarios and their depiction as data
images.
Insulting Others
The use of insulting language has a variety of recipients and
targets in the debates accompanying the SLR scenario videos.
Users offend and threaten as part of the user-user interaction
(“how about you come down here to Texas and I’ll put some
knuckle bumps on your IGNORANT head, BOY!!” B061–16),
they insult people outside of YouTube because of their
worldviews (“Send this video to all moronic climate deniers.”
B256) and make openly racist statements (“I would be ﬁne if the
Earth decided to drown countries in the Middle-East and Africa”
B282 and “too many indians anyway” B166–22). Tracing the
posting behavior of users in this segment across multiple video
discussions shows that they are either particularly active
commenters on the YouTube platform, or have only posted
once. In the case of active commenters, “insulting others”
coincides with online practices of hate speech and trolling,
which has been discussed thoroughly in academic literature
(Hopkinson, 2013; Lange, 2017; 2019; Cruz et al., 2018). As
Patricia Lange has highlighted, such practices of hate speech
have to be differentiated from voicing criticism, considering that
they do not involve any substantive occupation with the issues at
hand (Lange, 2007, 6). Such comments in the context of this study
mainly represent political views of the far right, and insult liberal
politicians, the press, foreigners or ethnic minorities (Muslims,
Jews, Indians).
DISCUSSION
As the typology in the results section shows, users operationalize
different strategies to make sense of the video content, to
appropriate the SLR mappings, and to negotiate aspects of the
scenarios among them. This following discussion evaluates
whether
and
how
the
distinct
practices
of
articulated
knowledge appropriation are related to each other. Moreover,
connections are drawn from the identiﬁed practices to higher
level issues relevant to online practices of scientiﬁc knowledge
appropriation. On the one hand, this includes the discussion of
ambiguity in the content, comments and media environment. On
the other hand, the section discusses the relationship between
information credibility and knowledge appropriation.
Ambiguity in Video Content, Comments and
Media Environment
“Ambiguity” emerged as a salient theme from the comparison
and relational analysis of the practices (categories). Quoting poet
William Empson, ambiguity can be understood as “an indecision
as to what you mean, an intention to mean several things, a
probability that one or other or both of two things has been
meant, and the fact that a statement has several meanings”
(Empson, 1947, 5f). Ambiguity can therefore have afﬁnities
with terms such as vagueness, uncertainty, doubtfulness or
equivocality. In the context of the study, we can identify
ambiguities in all aspects of the research material–the videos
and their visual scenarios, YouTube as a repository for science-
related information and the comments of the post-video
discussions.
The fact that users have an ambiguous relationship has already
been addressed explicitly for the practice “relativising the
information.”
Comments
and
their
authors
consider
the
scenario depicted, but keep it at arm’s length using rhetoric
tactics such as irony and sarcasm. The use these tactics can be
understood as a method of users to make their reservations
towards the video content expressive and accountable to other
users. As ethnomethodologist Harold Garﬁnkel has argued,
members of communities and groups use distinct methods to
make
their
interactions
with
others
“visibly
rational-
andreportable-for-all-practical-purposes” or “accountable” as
organizations of commonplace everyday activities (Garﬁnkel,
1991, vii). This feature of all communicative group interaction
has also been particularly acknowledged and discussed for the
case of social media (Thielmann, 2012). We may therefore speak
about articulated ambiguity with regard to the post-video
discussions at hand. As a matter of fact, commenters do not
only articulate ambiguity in the practice of “relativising the
information.” Rather, articulated ambiguity is also a feature of
various comments of other segments such as “embedding popular
narratives.” By embedding popular narratives, users connect the
visual facts with broader narratives of ﬂooded cities (Atlantis) and
futures (Waterworld) to make sense of the scenario depicted.
They thereby signal to others that they consider the scenarios as
an interesting future projection, without considering its scientiﬁc
soundness.
The crucial role of articulated ambiguity in the comments and
debates points to the fact that users cannot realistically evaluate
the credibility of the information depicted within the situated
practices of a YouTube media experience. The lack of perceived
credibility can equally be attributed to characteristics of the media
content and to the way the content is embedded within online
media ecologies. It is obvious that the producers of the SLR videos
heavily mixed formalistic conventions, storytelling and aesthetics
of different visual genres. This is true for both animations, but can
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
February 2021 | Volume 6 | Article 613167
10
Hirsbrunner
Negotiating the Data Deluge


here be illustrated with the case of video 1: The piece by Climate
Central/The Daily Conversation can equally be read as a
scientiﬁc visualization, a clip for political campaigning or a
ﬁctional story. The visualizations of ﬂooding are informed by
the insights of scientiﬁc studies, (e.g. Strauss et al., 2012; Strauss
et al., 2015) and designate two alternative scenarios of global
warming (two and four degrees), which evoke traditional
conventions of uncertainty representation in climate research.
A political reading is triggered by the depicted choice between
two future pathways: A sustainable and a detrimental path. This
presentation
of
choices
is
informed
by
scenarios
of
the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC, 2013) and
the international climate negotiations within the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC, 2015).
The caption of the video on YouTube also invites a political reading
of the imagery depicted, stating that “President Donald Trump’s
policies may lock us into 4 of warming.” With this comment, it
becomes clear that certain policies and politics may be better suited
to achieve the internationally agreed limitation of global warming
to two degrees instead of a more detrimental scenario of four
degrees. Finally, several esthetical design elements evoke tropes of
apocalyptic ﬁction movies. This includes the visual focus on
drowning monuments of cultural identiﬁcation such as the
American statue of liberty and the White House, and the
pompous, heavily produced soundtrack with its menacing
undertones.
Articulated ambiguity cannot only be attributed to the
characteristics of the video content, but also to YouTube as
the
enabling
media
environment.
The
prominence
of
ambiguity in the comments shows that users are aware of the
challenges online media poses to information source attribution.
Users make this awareness accountable to others by their use of
articulated ambiguity within the comments. As S. Shyam Sundar
has
shown,
assessments
of
information
credibility
are
traditionally performed by considering the trustworthiness of
the communicator. If the attributed source of a piece of
information
is
a
credible
person
or
organization,
then,
according
to
conventional
wisdom,
that
information
is
probably reliable” (Sundar, 2008, 73). Attributing information
to a single actor in the digital age, however, is often difﬁcult
because of the multiple layers of sources in online information
transmission (idid). Sundar speciﬁes several cognitive heuristics
that play a role in source evaluations within online media,
including aspects such as the machine, bandwagon, authority,
social presence, helper and identity. Several of these heuristics
are likely to be triggered in the case of the SLR maps on YouTube
discussed within this study. We can again examine the example
of video 1 in this context. Truly assessing the credibility of the
mapped ﬂooding would include evaluating the trustworthiness
of elements such as the underlying elevation models (NOAA,
United StatesS LiDAR consortium, Climate Central), the future
projections of CO2 emissions, the melting of polar caps and
following SLR scenarios (several research institutes), their three-
dimensional rendering (Google Earth Engine, Climate Central),
the animation of the maps for the video (independent
producers,
The
Daily
Conversation
team)
and
ﬁnally
YouTube’s choice to recommend the video as a result of a
“sea-level rise” search query. No single actor is in sufﬁcient
control of the production and distribution chain in order to
become
a
trustworthy
actor
establishing
comprehensive
credibility of the source, (i.e. the video). The impossibility of
source attribution and evaluation is further severed by the time
constrains of YouTube video consumption. YouTube users will
comment and articulate their assessment while or shortly after
watching the video, which then leaves a time span of about ﬁve
to 6 min in our present example of video 1. Evidently, “to look
up sea-level rise on YouTube” doesn’t allow for the same level of
source attribution and evaluation than writing a master thesis
on the subject.
CREDIBILITY AND APPROPRIATION
Considering the focus of the study on knowledge appropriation, it
seems
important
to
ask
how
credibility
attribution
and
appropriation
are
related
to
each
other.
Does
a
high
attribution
of
credibility
in
a
comment
signal
a
high
knowledge appropriation by the relevant user? Does a low
attribution of credibility suggest a low appropriation of the
information? To evaluate these questions, the established
practices
were
continuously
compared,
sorted
and
diagrammed as proposed by grounded theory literature. Most
notably, social scientist Adele Clarke, (2003) has conceptualized
such techniques of grounded theory mapping. She recommends
the drawing of situational, social worlds/arenas and positional
maps for the sorting of categories and the identiﬁcation of further
high-level issues for theory development. In the context of the
present study, the continuous visual process of comparison led to
the diagram shown as Figure 3. The visualization can be
understood as a positional map, laying out “the major
positions taken, and not taken, in the data vis-à-vis particular
discursive axes of variation and difference, concern, and
controversy surrounding complicated issues in the situation”
(Clarke, 2003, 554, emphasis in original). Figure 3 sorts the
practices of articulated knowledge appropriation (Limitations
and Future Outlook) within a continuum between low and high
attribution of credibility on the x-axis and low vs. high knowledge
appropriation on the y-axis.20 On the one end of the credibility
scale (left in Figure 3), users debate future actions based on the
information provided by the scenarios depicted. They verbalize
their readiness to take action to mitigate the impacts of climate
change or adapt to it (‘debating future action’). They neither
challenge the SLR mappings nor the underlying science (climate
impact research), and are often familiar with the scientiﬁc basis of
climate change. To a greater extent, they often do not even
address what is seen, but use the visual scenarios as a higher-
level conscription device (Henderson, 1991; Hirsbrunner, in
press) to mobilize for climate action. Some users seem new to
the risks at stake and verbalize a more informational absorption
20Credibility is characterized here as “believability” in information, without
necessarily including elements of dependability and reliability (Fogg and Tseng
1999).
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
February 2021 | Volume 6 | Article 613167
11
Hirsbrunner
Negotiating the Data Deluge


of the scenarios depicted (“locating impacts”). They acknowledge
and absorb the depicted information, taking it as it is, and without
engaging in much further interpretation and imagination. On the
other end of the credibility scale (right in Figure 3), users explicitly
challenge the plausibility of the scenarios depicted. They discard
them as unscientiﬁc and misleading ways of portraying the future.
They also discredit the producers of the maps, as well as climate
scientists and liberal politicians at the forefront of the climate
debate (“challenging the reality of anthropogenic climate change”).
In between, we ﬁnd the comments and communicative
practices with considerable articulated ambiguity. They neither
take the scenarios for granted, nor do they discard them. Instead,
users play with the interpretative ﬂexibility of the imagery and
often exhibit great efforts to formulate their comments and
engage with others. They typically refrain from using existent
mainstream frames within the climate debate, but rather come up
with new, situated meanings that reference the disturbing
information, narrative and aesthetics. It is therefore suggested
that users articulating ambiguity may actually better appropriate
the media content and scenarios than those attributing a high
credibility to the image (“debating future action,” “locating
impacts”). Here, we can come back to deﬁnition by Marlene
FIGURE 3 | Credibility and appropriation (visualization by the author).
FIGURE 2 | How Earth Would Look If All The Ice Melted (© National Geographic / Science Insider).
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
February 2021 | Volume 6 | Article 613167
12
Hirsbrunner
Negotiating the Data Deluge


Faber, characterizing appropriation as an action aiming to bridge
the distance between the appropriating subject and the object to
be appropriated (Faber, 2001, 29). To stick with this analogy,
appropriation may therefore be higher the longer the bridge is. In
our case of knowledge appropriation on YouTube, appropriation
will then be highest in the case of the practice “envisioning
further,”
despite
a
relatively
low
degree
of
attributed
credibility.
Users
“envisioning
further”
only
take
the
information
depicted
as
a
starting
point
for
their
own
imagination. They test the boundaries of the imaginary, add
facets to it and draw relationships to everyday activities,
personal value considerations and contemporary events and
matters
of
concern.
This
future
imagination
is
often
a
collaborative
endeavor
with
several
commenters
adding
imaginative elements on top of each other. They thereby bridge
the large gap between the information depicted and a successful
future imagination with the performative act of commenting in the
post-video discussions. Against this background, it seems necessary
to
reevaluate
the
role
of
ambiguity
in
science-related
communication on YouTube and other online media settings.
Clarity of information may be an understandable objective for
science communicators of all kinds. Teachers will strive for clarity
in their pedagogic experiments with the video format to explain
mathematic formula on YouTube. Epidemologists will stick to
simplicity and precision while giving instructions to protect against
the spreading of a virus. Communication experts such as Edward
Maibach has also made the case for clarity in climate change
communication: “To effectively share what we know, we need
simple clear messages, repeated often, by a variety of trusted
sources” (Maibach, 2019, 337). The insights from the present
study also suggest, however, that the format of online videos
may not be particularly suited to convincingly communicate
such clarity from trusted sources, as it simply doesn’t oscillate
with the way people consume, evaluate and debate science-related
information via YouTube and similar media settings. Moreover,
ambiguity of information may actually be valuable and have a
positive impact on problem deﬁnition, future imagination,
discursive engagement and knowledge appropriation in case of
“wicked problems” (Hulme, 2009) such as climate change.
LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE OUTLOOK
This study was designed as a qualitative and explorative endeavor
with particular focus on posting behavior and situated practices of
knowledge appropriation on YouTube. As a result, the distinctive
practices described in Credibility and Appropriation may not be
directly and generally transferable to other scientiﬁc issues, types
of visual media, or audiences. It could therefore be beneﬁcial to
compare the results of this study with other science-related post-
video discussions. A promising comparison would involve the
situated appropriation of the chart #ﬂattenthecurve in the context
of the COVID19 debates on YouTube and other social media
channels. Among other things, this would allow for a more
quantitative assessment of different practices and their relative
importance in post-video discussions. A second limitation of the
study is due to its exclusive reliance on actively commenting users.
Of course, most users on YouTube only watch videos and do not
comment. To obtain an understanding of the appropriation
practices of silent users, it would be revealing to conduct
narrative interviews or to observe audiences while they
consume and engage with YouTube content and users.
Finally, it would be productive to explore mixed methods
approaches in order to analyze greater datasets and to
evaluate representativeness of ﬁndings. A promising way
forward in this regard is the combination of qualitative
coding with machine learning. As explorations with such
approaches have shown (Chen et al., 2018; Smith et al., 2018;
Baumer, 2020), machine learning can be used to support the
qualitative coding of extensive social media datasets as well as
interpretative analysis and theory building.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions presented in the study are included in
the article/Supplementary Material, further inquiries can be
directed to the corresponding author.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The author conﬁrms being the sole contributor of this work and
has approved it for publication.
FUNDING
The research for this study has been funded by the Geo.X network
for the geosciences in Berlin-Brandenburg (Germany) and was
carried out at the Human-Centered Computing research group at
Freie Universität Berlin.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I also acknowledge support by the Open Access Publication
Initiative of Freie Universität Berlin.
REFERENCES
Allgaier, J. (2019). Science and environmental communication on YouTube:
strategically distorted communications in online videos on climate change and
climate engineering. Front. Commun. 4, 36. doi:10.3389/fcomm.2019.00036
Anderson, A. A., and Huntington, H. E. (2017). Social media, science, and attack
discourse: how Twitter discussions of climate change use sarcasm and incivility.
Sci. Commun. 39 (5), 598–620. doi:10.1177/1075547017735113
Androutsopoulos, J. (2016). Mediatisierte Praktiken: zur Rekontextualisierung von
Anschlusskommunikation in den sozialen Medien. Sprachliche und kommunikative
Praktiken. Berlin, Germany: De Gruyter. doi:10.1515/9783110451542-014
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
February 2021 | Volume 6 | Article 613167
13
Hirsbrunner
Negotiating the Data Deluge


Baumer, E. P. S., Siedel, D., McDonnell, L., Zhong, J., Sittikul, P., and McGee, M.
(2020). Topicalizer: reframing core concepts in machine learning visualization
by co-designing for interpretivist scholarship. Hum. Comput. Interact. 35,
452–480. doi:10.1080/07370024.2020.1734460
Bimber, B., and Gil de Zúñiga, H. (2020). The unedited public sphere. New Media
Soc. 22 (4), 700–715. doi:10.1177/1461444819893980
Blumenthal, I., Schlenther, C., Hirsbrunner, S. D., Stock, M., and Nocke, T. (2016).
Climate impacts for German schools - an educational web portal solution. In
handbook of climate change communication. Berlin, Germany: Springer http://edoc.
gfz-potsdam.de/pik/display.epl?modepeople&fnameS.&nameHirsbrunner
Burgess, J., and Green, J. (2018). YouTube: online video and participatory culture.
Cambridge, United Kingdom: John Wiley and Sons.
Caquard, S., and Cartwright, W. (2014). Narrative cartography: from mapping
stories to the narrative of maps and mapping. Cartogr. J. 51 (2), 101–106. doi:10.
1179/0008704114z.000000000130
Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory: a practical guide through
qualitative analysis. London, Thousand Oaks, CA, United States: Sage
Publications.
Chen, N-C., Drouhard, M., Kocielnik, R., Suh, J., and Aragon, C. R. (2018). Using
machine learning to support qualitative coding in social science: shifting the
focus to ambiguity. ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst. 9 (4), 21.
Clarke, A. E., Friese, C., and Washburn, Rachel. (2015). Situational analysis in
practice: mapping research with grounded theory. London, United Kingdom:
Routledge.
Clarke, A. E. (2003). Situational analyses: grounded theory mapping after the
postmodern turn. Symbolic Interact. 26 (4), 553–576. doi:10.1525/si.2003.26.
4.553
Corbin, J., and Strauss, A. (1990). Grounded theory research: procedures, canons,
and evaluative criteria. Qual. Sociol. 13 (1), 3–21. doi:10.1007/bf00988593
Corry, O., and Jørgensen, D. (2015). Beyond “deniers” and “believers”: towards a
map of the politics of climate change. Global Environ. Change 32 (May),
165–174. doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.01.006
Couldry, N. (2004). Theorising media as practice. Soc. Semiotic. 14 (2), 115–132.
doi:10.1080/1035033042000238295
Cruz, A. G. B., Seo, Y., and Rex, M. (2018). Trolling in online communities: a
practice-based theoretical perspective. Inf. Soc. 34 (1), 15–26. doi:10.1080/
01972243.2017.1391909
Dang-Anh, M., Pfeifer, S., Reisner, C., Villioth, L., Ramella, A. L., Meyer, C., et al.
(2017). Medienpraktiken: Situieren, Erforschen, Reﬂektieren. Navigation, 17
http://dokumentix.ub.uni-siegen.de/opus/volltexte/2017/1128/
Dorne, V. D., and Navarro, P. (2011). The journalist’s identity in the social media:
discursive practices and subjectiﬁcation. Acta Sci. Lang. Cult. 33 (2), 231–240.
doi:10.4025/actascilangcult.v33i2.13295
Doyle, J. (2011). Mediating climate change. Burlington, VT, United States: Ashgate
Publishing Limited.
Doyle, J. (2009). Seeing the climate? ecosee: image, rhetoric, nature. Sidney I Dobrin
und Sean Morey. Albany, NY, United States: SUNY Press.
Empson, W. (1947). Seven types of ambiguity. London, United Kingdom: Chatto
and Windus.
Eppler, M. J., Mengis, J., and Bresciani, S. (2008). Seven types of visual ambiguity:
on
the merits
and
risks of
multiple
interpretations
of
collaborative
visualizations. in 12th International Conference Information Visualisation.
(London, United Kingdom: IEEE), 391–396. doi:10.1109/IV.2008.47
Faber, M. (2001). “Medienrezeption als Aneignung,” in In der sprechende
Zuschauer. Editors W. Holly, U. Püschel, and J. Bergmann (Wiesbaden,
Germany: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften)). doi:10.1007/978-3-322-
89599-8
Fogg, B. J., and Tseng, H. (1999). The elements of computer credibility. Proceedings
of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems the CHI is the
limit – CHI ’99. Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States: ACM Press), 80–87.
doi:10.1145/302979.303001
Garﬁnkel,
H. (1991). Studies in ethnomethodology. 1st edn. Cambridge,
United Kingdom: Polity.
Gerlitz, C., and Rieder, B. (2018). Tweets are not created equal. Int. J. Commun. 12,
528–547.
Glaser, B. G. (1978). Theoretical sensitivity: advances in the methodology of
grounded theory. Mill Valley, CA, United States: The Sociology Press.
Glaser, B., and Strauss, A. (1999). The discovery of grounded theory: strategies for
qualitative research. Chicago, IL, United States: Aldine Transaction.
Gray, J., Bounegru, L., Milan, S., and Ciuccarelli, P. (2016). Ways of seeing data:
toward a critical literacy for data visualizations as research objects and research
devices. In innovative methods in media and communication research. Berlin,
Germany: Springer, 227–251. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-40700-5
Gurevitch, L. (2014). Google warming. Convergence 20 (1), 85–107. doi:10.1177/
1354856513516266
Haarstad, H., Sareen, S., Wanvik, T. I., Grandin, J., Kjærås, K., Oseland, S. E., et al.
(2018). Transformative social science? Modes of engagement in climate and
energy solutions. Energy Research and Social Science 42 (August), 193–197.
doi:10.1016/j.erss.2018.03.021
Harley, J. B. (1988). “Maps, knowledge, and power,” in In the iconography of
landscape: essays on the symbolic representation, design and use of past
environments. Editors D. Cosgrove and S. Daniels (Avon, NY, United States:
Cambridge University Press), 277–312.
Henderson, K. (1991). Flexible sketches and inﬂexible data bases: visual communication,
conscription devices, and boundary objects in design engineering. Sci. Technol.
Hum. Val. 16 (4), 448–473. doi:10.1177/016224399101600402
Hirsbrunner, S. D. (in press). A new science for future. Climate impact modeling and
the quest for digital openness In pressLocating Media/Situierte Medien.
Bielefeld: transcript, https://www.transcript-verlag.de/978-3-8376-5265-9/a-
new-science-for-future/
Hopke, J. E., and Hestres, L. E. (2018). Visualizing the Paris climate talks on Twitter:
media and climate stakeholder visual social media during COP21. Social Media +
Society 4 (3), 2056305118782687. doi:10.1177/2056305118782687
Hopkinson, C. (2013). Trolling in online discussions: from provocation to
community building. Bse 39 (1), 5–25. doi:10.5817/bse2013-1-1
Hulme, M. (2009). Why we disagree about climate change: understanding
controversy,
inaction
and
opportunity.
4th
edn.
Cambridge,
United Kingdom ; New York, NY, United States: Cambridge University Press.
IPCC (2013). Assessment Report: The physical science base (summary for policy
makers). Intergovernmental Panel on climate change, 5. Geneva, Switzerland:
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Lange, P. G. (2019). Thanks for watching: an anthropological study of video sharing
on YouTube. Boulder, CO: University Press of Colorado. doi:10.5876/
9781607329558
Lange, P. G. (2007). “Commenting on comments: investigating responses to
antagonism on youtube.” Tampa, Florida, United States Paper presented at
the conference of the Society for Applied Anthropology March 31, 2007, http://
web3.cas.usf.edu/main/depts/ANT/cma/Lange-SfAA-Paper-2007.pdf
Lange, P. G. (2017). Feeding the trolls: strategies for raising the bar in online
interaction. Parameters of the Possible 11, 81–91.
Mahony, M., and Hulme, M. (2012). The colour of risk: an exploration of the
IPCC’s ‘Burning Embers’ diagram. Spont. Gen. 6 (1), 75–89. doi:10.4245/
sponge.v6i1.16075
Maibach, E. (2019). “Increasing public awareness and facilitating behavior change:
two guiding heuristics,” in Biodiversity and climate change: transforming the
biosphere. Editors L. Hannah and T. Lovejoy. 2nd edn (New Haven, CT,
United States: Yale University Press).
Maibach, E., Roser-Renouf, C., and Leiserowitz, A. (2009). “Global warming’s six
Americas 2009: an audience segmentation analysis May.” https://trid.trb.org/
view/889822. doi:10.13140/RG.2.2.28922.90563
Manzo, K. (2009). Imaging vulnerability: the iconography of climate change. Area
42 (1), 96–107. doi:10.1111/j.1475-4762.2009.00887.x
Manzo, K. (2010). Beyond polar bears? Re-envisioning climate change. Met. Apps
17 (2), 196–208. doi:10.1002/met.193
Marres, N., and Gerlitz, C. (2015). Interface methods: renegotiating relations
between digital social research, STS and sociology. Sociol. Rev. 64 (1), 21–46.
doi:10.1111/1467-954X.12314
Medienpädagogischer Forschungsverbund Südwest (2015). JIM 2015 Jugend,
information, (Multi-)Media Basisstudie zum Medienumgang 12- bis 19-
Jähriger in Deutschland Stuttgart: Landesanstalt für Kommunikation Baden-
Württemberg (LFK), https://www.mpfs.de/ﬁleadmin/ﬁles/Studien/JIM/2015/
JIM_Studie_2015.pdf
Metag, J., Füchslin, T., and Schäfer, M. S. (2017). Global warming’s ﬁve Germanys:
a typology of Germans’ views on climate change and patterns of media use and
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
February 2021 | Volume 6 | Article 613167
14
Hirsbrunner
Negotiating the Data Deluge


information.
Publ.
Understand.
Sci.
26
(4),
434–451.
doi:10.1177/
0963662515592558
Montford, A. W. (2010). The hockey stick illusion: climategate and the corruption of
science. London, United Kingdom: Stacey International.
Schäfer, M. T., and Van Es, K. (2017). The dataﬁed society. studying culture through data
(Amsterdam, Netherlands: Amsterdam University Press). doi:10.5117/9789462981362
Nisbet, M. C. (2009). Communicating climate change: why frames matter for
public engagement. Environment 51 (2), 12–23. doi:10.3200/envt.51.2.12-23
Orlikowski, W. J., and Scott, S. V. (2015). Exploring material-discursive practices.
J. Manag. Stud. 52 (5), 697–705. doi:10.1111/joms.12114
O’Neill, S. J., and Smith, N. (2014). Climate change and visual imagery. Wires
Climate Change 5 (1), 73–87. doi:10.1002/wcc.249
O’Neill, S., and Nicholson-Cole, S. (2009). “Fear won’t do it”: promoting positive
engagement with climate change through visual and iconic representations. Sci.
Commun. 30 (3), 355–379. doi:10.1177/1075547008329201
Pfeffer, Jürgen, Katja Mayer and Fred Morstatter (2018). “Tampering with Twitter’s
sample API.” EPJ Data Science 7 (1), 1–21. doi:10.1140/epjds/s13688-018-0178-0
Pink, S., Horst, H., Postill, J., Hjorth, L., Lewis, T., and Tacchi, J. (2015). Digital
ethnography: principles and practice. Los Angeles, LA, United States: SAGE
Publications Ltd.
Rammert, W., and Schubert, C. (2006). Technograﬁe: zur Mikrosoziologie der
Technik. Frankfurt, Germany: Campus Verlag.
R. H. Jones, A. Chik, and C. A. Hafner (2015). Discourse and digital practices: doing
discourse analysis in the digital age (London, New York, United States:
Routledge, Taylor and Francis Group).
Rogers, R. (2013). Digital methods. Cambridge, MA, United States: The MIT Press.
Rogers, R. (2015). “Digital methods for web research,” in Emerging trends in the
social and behavioral sciences: an interdisciplinary, searchable, and linkable
resource. Editors R. A. Scott and S. M. Kosslyn.
Rose, G. (2015). Rethinking the geographies of cultural ’objects’ through digital
technologies. Prog. Hum. Geogr. 40 (3), 334–351. doi:10.1177/0309132515580493
Rose, G. (2001). Visual methodologies: an introduction to the interpretation of
visual materials. 1st edn. London; Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.
Rose, G. (2016). Visual methodologies: an introduction to the interpretation of
visual materials. 4th edn. London; Thousand Oaks, CA, United States: SAGE
Publications.
Schneider, B. (2016). Burning worlds of cartography: a critical approach to climate
cosmograms of the anthropocene. Geo: Geogr. Environ. 3 (2), e00027. doi:10.
1002/geo2.27
Schneider, B. (2017). “The future face of the earth: the visual semantics of the future
in the climate change imagery of the IPCC,” in In cultures of prediction in
atmospheric and climate science: Epistemic and cultural shifts in computer-based
modelling and simulation. Editors M. Heymann, G. Gramelsberger, and
M. Mahony. 1st ed. (Abingdon, United Kingdom: Routledge).
Schneider, B. (2012). Climate model simulation visualization from a visual studies
perspective. Wires Clim Change 3 (2), 185–193. doi:10.1002/wcc.162
Schüttpelz, E. (2006). Die medienanthropologische Kehre der Kulturtechniken.
Arch. Medienges. 6, 87–110.
Shapiro, M. A., and Park, H. W. (2018). Climate change and YouTube: deliberation
potential in post-video discussions. Environmental Communication 12 (1),
115–131. doi:10.1080/17524032.2017.1289108
Sheppard, S. R. J., Shaw, A., Flanders, D., Burch, S., Wiek, A., Carmichael, J., et al.
(2011). Future visioning of local climate change: a framework for community
engagement and planning with scenarios and visualisation. Futures 43 (4),
400–412. doi:10.1016/j.futures.2011.01.009
Sheppard, S. R. J. (2012). Visualizing climate change: a guide to visual
communication of climate change and developing local solutions. Abingdon,
New York, United States: Routledge.
Smith, Alison., Kumar, Varun., Boyd-Graber, Jordan., Kevin, Seppi., and Leah,
Findlater (2018). Closing the loop: user-centered design and evaluation of a
human-in-the-loop topic modeling system. Proceedings of the 2018 conference
on human information interaction and retrieval - IUI, 18. Tokyo, Japan: ACM
Press, 293–304. doi:10.1145/3172944.3172965
Star, S. L., and Griesemer, J. R. (1989). Institutional ecology, ‘Translations’ and boundary
objects: amateurs and professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of vertebrate zoology,
1907-39. Soc. Stud. Sci. 19, 387–420. doi:10.1177/030631289019003001
Strauss, B. H., Ziemlinski, R., Weiss, J. L., and Overpeck, J. T. (2012). Tidally
adjusted estimates of topographic vulnerability to sea level rise and ﬂooding for
the contiguous United States. Environ. Res. Lett. 7 (1), 014033. doi:10.1088/
1748-9326/7/1/014033
Strauss, B. H., Kulp, S., and Levermann, A. (2015). Carbon choices determine US
cities committed to futures below sea level. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112 (44),
13508–13513. doi:10.1073/pnas.1511186112
Strübing, J. (2006). “Webnograﬁe? Zu den methodischen Voraussetzungen einer
ethnographischen
Erforschung
des
Internets,”
in
Technograﬁe:
zur
Mikrosoziologie
der
Technik.
Editors
W.
Rammert
and
C.
Schubert
(Frankfurt am Main, Germany: Campus Verlag).
Sundar, S. S. (2008). “The MAIN model: a heuristic approach to understanding
technology effects on credibility,” in Digital media, youth, and credibility.
Editors M. J. Metzger and A. J. Flanagin (Cambridge, MA, United States:
The MIT Press), 73–100. https://www.issuelab.org/resources/875/875.pdf
Tereick, Jana. (2013). “Die” Klimalüge “auf youtube. Eine korpusgestützte
Diskursanalyse
der
Aushandlung
subversiver
Positionen
in
der
partizipatorischen
Kultur.”
Online-Diskurse.
Theorien
und
Methoden
transmedialer Online-Diskursforschung, 226–257.
Thielmann, T., and Schüttpelz, E. (2013). Akteur-medien-theorie. Bielefeld,
Germany: Transcript.
Thielmann, T. (2012). Taking into account. Harold Garﬁnkels Beitrag für eine
Theorie sozialer Medien. Z. Medienwiss. 6 (1), 85–102.
Uldam, J., and Askanius, T. (2013). Online civic cultures: debating climate change
activism on youtube. Int. J. Commun. 7, 1185–1204.
Ulmer,
B.,
and
Bergmann,
J.
(1993).
“Medienrekonstruktionen
als
kommunikative
Gattungen?,”
in
Medienrezeption
als
Aneignung:
Methoden
und
Perspektiven
qualitativer
Medienforschung.
Editors
W. Holly
and U. Püschel (Paris, France: Springer VS Verlag
für
Sozialwissenschaften)). doi:10.1007/978-3-322-87281-4
UNFCCC (2015). United Nations framework convention on climate Change Paris
agreement. Conclusion date: December 12, 2015, United Nations Treaty Series
Online, registration no. I-54113Bonn: United Nations Framework Convention
on
Climate
Change:
https://treaties.un.org/pages/AdvanceSearch.aspx?
tabUNTS&clang_en
Vieweg, S., Hughes, A. L., Starbird, K., and Palen, L. (2010). Microblogging during
two natural hazards events: what Twitter may contribute to situational
awareness. In proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in
computing systems. Atlanta, GA, United States: CHI ’10Association for
Computing Machinery), 1079–1088. doi:10.1145/1753326.1753486
Walsh, L. (2014). “Tricks, hockey sticks, and the myth of natural inscription: how
the visual rhetoric of climategate conﬂated climate with character,” in In image
politics of climate change visualizations, imaginations, documentations. Editors
B. Schneider and T. Nocke, 81–104.
Wang, S., Corner, A., Chapman, D., and Markowitz, E. (2018). Public engagement
with climate imagery in a changing digital landscape. WIREs Clim Change 9 (2),
e509. doi:10.1002/wcc.509
Whalen, J. M., Pexman, P. M., and Gill, A. J. (2009). “Should Be fun-not!”. J. Lang.
Soc. Psychol. 28 (3), 263–280. doi:10.1177/0261927x09335253
Wissenschaftskommunikation, Forum. (2016). Wissenschaftsbarometer 2016:
Eine
repräsentative
Meinungsumfrage.
Berlin,
Germany:
Forum
Wissenschaftskommunikation
https://www.wissenschaft-im-dialog.de/
ﬁleadmin/user_upload/Projekte/Wissenschaftsbarometer/Dokumente_
16/Wissenschaftsbarometer2016_web.pdf
Wrana, D. (2015). “Zur analyse von Positionierungen in diskursiven Praktiken,” in
Erziehungswissenschaftliche
Diskursforschung:
Empirische
Analysen
zu
Bildungs- und Erziehungsverhältnissen. Editors S. Fegter, F. Kessl, A. Langer,
M. Ott, D. Rothe, D. Wrana, et al. (Wiesbaden, Germany: Springer
Fachmedien)), 123–141. doi:10.1007/978-3-531-18738-9_6
Copyright © 2021 Hirsbrunner. This is an open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution
or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the
copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is
cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
February 2021 | Volume 6 | Article 613167
15
Hirsbrunner
Negotiating the Data Deluge
