Narratives of Collective Action in YouTube’s Discourse on Veganism
Arianna Pera, Luca Maria Aiello
IT University of Copenhagen
arpe@itu.dk, luai@itu.dk
Abstract
Narratives can be powerful tools for inspiring action on press-
ing societal issues such as climate change. While social sci-
ence theories offer frameworks for understanding the narra-
tives that arise within collective movements, these are rarely
applied to the vast data available from social media platforms,
which play a significant role in shaping public opinion and
mobilizing collective action. This gap in the empirical eval-
uation of online narratives limits our understanding of their
relationship with public response. In this study, we focus on
plant-based diets as a form of pro-environmental action and
employ Natural Language Processing to operationalize a the-
oretical framework of moral narratives specific to the vegan
movement. We apply this framework to narratives found in
YouTube videos promoting environmental initiatives such as
Veganuary, Meatless March, and No Meat May. Our analysis
reveals that several narrative types, as defined by the theory,
are empirically present in the data. To identify narratives with
the potential to elicit positive public engagement, we used
text processing to estimate the proportion of comments sup-
porting collective action across narrative types. Video nar-
ratives advocating social fight, whether through protest or
through efforts to convert others to the cause, are associated
with a stronger sense of collective action in the respective
comments. These narrative types also demonstrate increased
semantic coherence and alignment between the message and
public response, markers typically associated with successful
collective action. Our work offers new insights into the com-
plex factors that influence the emergence of collective action,
thereby informing the development of effective communica-
tion strategies within social movements.
Introduction
Storytelling is a cornerstone of modern communication,
with its influence permeating diverse realms from market-
ing to political discourse (Lund, Cohen, and Scarles 2018;
Seargeant 2020). The power of compelling narratives ex-
tends beyond individual persuasion and holds the poten-
tial to catalyze collective shifts in opinion, mobilize con-
sensus, and foster social cooperation toward shared goals.
Social media have democratized opportunities for creating
and sharing narratives on a global scale, empowering in-
dividuals to shape opinion formation, democratic deliber-
ation, and collective action (Yasseri et al. 2016; Jennings,
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Suzuki, and Hubbard 2021; Monti et al. 2022). In particu-
lar, video-sharing websites like YouTube have emerged as
powerful platforms for disseminating information and mo-
bilizing communities (Uldam and Askanius 2013).
In the past decade, social media facilitated the rapid emer-
gence of social movements that weave narratives in favor
of environmental protection and climate action. Research
suggests that climate discussions on social platforms, es-
pecially those related to initiatives that focus on daily life
activities, can significantly enhance public awareness of en-
vironmental issues (Mavrodieva et al. 2019). One such ac-
tivity is the transition to a plant-based diet, which is seen as
a tangible and effective action to mitigate the environmental
damage caused by over-consumption of animal-based prod-
ucts (Masson-Delmotte et al. 2019; Judge, Fernando, and
Begeny 2022). Over the past decade, pro-vegan and pro-
vegetarian movements have launched various challenges to
raise awareness and encourage the public’s transition to-
wards a plant-based diet. A prominent example is Vegan-
uary, an initiative started in 2014 encouraging people to em-
brace the vegan diet for the entire month of January each
year. In 2023, the initiative attracted over 700k official par-
ticipants worldwide (veganuary.com 2023). The two other
largest initiatives of this kind, spanning over a month each
year, are Meatless March and No Meat May. The success of
these challenges relies heavily on participants and activists
sharing their experiences online, as this generally fosters a
sense of community and increases engagement (Hou 2023).
The effectiveness of these pro-environmental campaigns
is thought to be closely linked to the types of narratives
that they employ (Fernandez et al. 2015). The framing of
environmental issues can influence attention and shape par-
ticipation in political debates (Nisbet and Newman 2015),
for instance impacting the reactions to environmental scan-
dals (Torelli, Balluchi, and Lazzini 2020). Incorporating
persuasive communication strategies into pro-environmental
messages can shape the public perceptions of climate change
and facilitate behavioral shifts (Pelletier and Sharp 2008).
However, despite the extensive literature on storytelling in
social movements (Davis 2002; Fiskio 2012; Napoli and
Ouschan 2020) and the widely reported presence of collec-
tive action in climate change discourse (Bamberg, Rees, and
Seebauer 2015; Van Zomeren, Pauls, and Cohen-Chen 2019;
Schmitt et al. 2019; Hamann and Reese 2020; Furlong and
Proceedings of the Eighteenth International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media (ICWSM 2024)
1220


Vignoles 2021; Gulliver, Fielding, and Louis 2021; Judge,
Fernando, and Begeny 2022; Suitner et al. 2023), there is
very little quantitative evidence of how much different nar-
ratives on climate change covered by theoretical research are
effectively used in social media, and how strongly they are
associated with a public response that pledges support to
climate action. Addressing this gap is crucial to assess the
applicability of existing theoretical frameworks to common
social media practices and to enhance our understanding of
the persuasive potential of different narrative types.
In an effort to bridge this knowledge gap, we delved into
an exploration of vegan movements and their social cam-
paigns as a form of pro-environmental action. We opera-
tionalized a state-of-the-art theoretical framework of narra-
tives that classifies stories pertinent to the vegan ideology
using moral foundations (Napoli and Ouschan 2020). We
applied this framework to YouTube videos featuring plant-
based transition challenges (such as Veganuary, Meatless
March, and No Meat May) to categorize the narratives they
present. We did so to answer the following research ques-
tions:
RQ1. How closely do narratives used in YouTube discus-
sions about plant-based diets align with existing theoretical
categories?
RQ2. Are certain narrative types more frequently associated
with a public response advocating for collective action?
RQ3. What are the factors that can explain the emergence
of collective action responses in the reactions to videos pro-
moting plant-based diets?
Our study’s contribution lies in (i) operationalizing an ex-
isting social science theoretical framework of moral narra-
tives used in vegan discourse and mapping YouTube video
transcripts to it, (ii) examining the extent to which the lan-
guage used in video comments elicits the concept of collec-
tive action, and (iii) evaluating the significance of various
factors in explaining the emergence of collective action lan-
guage markers in comments.
Our findings indicate that videos whose narratives pro-
mote social fight, either in the form of protesting or attempt-
ing to convert others to the cause, tended to attract reac-
tions characterized by a more frequent presence of linguistic
markers that hint at collective action. These videos, along
with those emphasizing freedom of choice, demonstrated
the highest levels of semantic consistency across creators,
and the highest semantic alignment between the video tran-
script and the respective comments. Overall, we found that
an increased frequency of mentions of collective action in
video reactions was significantly associated with a smaller
size of the crowd of commenters, a greater content coher-
ence of a video within the reference narrative cluster, and
a higher frequency of linguistic markers expressing loyalty,
a moral dimension that characterizes narratives about social
fight, freedom of choice, and duty to educate others through
inspirational examples.
Theoretical Framework
Social science literature provides various theoretical frame-
works for understanding the role of storytelling in the con-
text of social movements (see Related Work). While such
movements originate from societal changes occurring at
a macro scale, their micro-level emergence is shaped by
cognitive processes, often triggered by collective action
frames (Johnston and Noakes 2005). These frames serve as
structures that shape individuals’ perceptions and motiva-
tions within a movement. Narratives can be seen as the em-
bodiment of these frames, used by opinion leaders as per-
suasive tools.
Given our specific interest in plant-based diets as a re-
sponse to climate change, we narrow our focus to narratives
within the vegan movement. Within this narrowed scope,
scholars have primarily relied on qualitative studies and in-
terviews to infer common narrative patterns. Through an in-
depth analysis of vegan blogs, Napoli and Ouschan (2020)
found six narrative types that are described with a combina-
tion of moral foundations and identity framing that emerge
from the stories. Compared to other theoretical categoriza-
tions of vegan narratives types (Waters 2022; Aavik 2023),
the framework by Napoli and Ouschan (2020) is semanti-
cally more comprehensive, and offers an operationalizable
map within the context of online content. Therefore, we
adopt such a narrative framework as our theoretical refer-
ence, focusing on the vegan movement as a specific case of
activism. While the framework predominantly emphasizes
animal welfare over explicit climate change concerns, its
broad scope allows for a versatile shift towards generic en-
vironmental protection without sacrificing relevance. In the
remainder of the paper, we will refer to the framework as the
moral vegan ideology. Next, we will describe the framework
itself, outline its theoretical underpinnings, and propose a
way to operationalize it.
Veganism Narratives
The moral vegan ideology framework delineates two groups
of archetypal narratives based on the type of collective iden-
tity they express: communal-oriented and agency-oriented.
This distinction is based on whether concern for others or
self-interest is featured more prominently when presenting
the efforts required for driving social change. This partition
aligns with the dichotomous moral positioning observed in
empirical psychological studies (Frimer and Walker 2009),
and with established dimensions of social cognition (Cuddy,
Fiske, and Glick 2008). Each of these two groups contains
three narrative types that are characterized by distinct moral
foundations integral to the vegan ideology: sanctity of life,
enacting the authentic self, and freedom. This categorization
results in the following narrative types: duty to educate, duty
to care, and duty to fight for the communal-oriented iden-
tity, and right to good health, right to inner peace, and right
to choose for the agency-oriented identity. Table 1 provides
a summary of the six narratives and their associated sub-
categories extracted from the original theoretical formula-
tion of the framework.
The concept of morality intertwines with the distinct nar-
rative types within a specific collective identity group. The
duty to care and right to good health narratives, both linked
to the sanctity of life foundation, embody respectively the
collective imperative to prioritize animal welfare alongside
1221


Communal
oriented
Agency
oriented
Sanctity of
life
Duty to care
(innocence loss,
harm to animals,
confronting
content)
Right to good health
(personal battles,
health benefits,
compassionate
relationship)
Enacting the
authentic
self
Duty to educate
(inform,
inspire the
community,
status remark)
Right to inner peace
(self-acceptance,
tension with
pre-vegan life)
Freedom
Duty to fight
(convert others,
protest/boycott,
harm to animals)
Right to choose
(personal story,
discuss diversity
of meanings,
respect)
Table 1: Six narratives types introduced by Napoli and
Ouschan (2020), defined as a combination of identity ex-
pression (columns) and moral foundations (rows). Each nar-
rative is divided into sub-categories shown in parenthesis.
Sub-categories highlighted in bold are those that we found
empirically in YouTube videos through our experiments.
that of humans and the value of personal health and well-
being. In the pursuit of enacting the authentic self, the duty
to educate narrative strives to inform and inspire others, par-
ticularly through community networks, while the right to in-
ner peace narrative works towards aligning actions and val-
ues to promote self-acceptance. Finally, narratives rooted in
the freedom moral foundation include the duty to fight, fo-
cusing on converting others to the vegan cause and gener-
ating global change for animal protection through protests,
product boycotting, and lobbying initiatives, and the right to
choose, grounded in a philosophy of respect, inclusivity, and
kindness.
Operationalization
The moral vegan ideology relies on two key concepts for
distinguishing narrative types: collective identity and moral
foundations. We operationalize them separately, as follows.
Collective Identity
To operationalize collective identity,
we extracted identity markers from text, focusing on first-
person pronouns in both singular and plural forms. Previous
studies have demonstrated the predictive nature of these pro-
nouns in expressing collective identity in terms of agency
and communion (Decter-Frain and Frimer 2016). We de-
rived a Collective Identity Index (CI Index) from pronoun
fractions:
CI Index = 0.5 + 0.5 · (f I −f we)
f I + f we + 1
(1)
where f• denotes the relative frequency of a pronoun group
in the text. The index is centered around 0.5: values around
0.5 suggest a balance between the use of first-person sin-
gular and plural pronouns, while values closer to 0 or 1 in-
dicate a focus on the community or the self, respectively.
Values shifted toward the two extremes of the range denote
“communal-oriented” (index ≤0.4) vs. “agency-oriented”
(index ≥0.6) narratives.
Moral Foundations
In the realm of moral foundations,
the moral vegan ideology explicitly acknowledges three cru-
cial factors: sanctity of life, enacting the authentic self, and
freedom, which play discriminative roles in defining story-
telling types. The Moral Foundation Theory (Graham et al.
2013) (MFT), encompassing pillars such as care, fairness,
loyalty, authority, and sanctity, provides a natural founda-
tion to quantify these factors. Notably, the concepts of sanc-
tity and care within MFT directly align with sanctity of life
and enacting the authentic self in the narrative framework.
Given the inherent relationship between the pillars of MFT
and the moral foundations identified in the narrative frame-
work, we opted to leverage MFT as a means to operational-
ize the latter. While several dictionary-based tools exist for
extracting MFT dimensions from text — such as the ex-
tensive lexicon developed by (Araque, Gatti, and Kalimeri
2020), which demonstrated good performance on multiple
Twitter datasets — they have limitations. Despite their pop-
ularity and interpretability, these tools are constrained by
fixed and limited vocabularies, only partial handling of word
variations, and a tendency for longer documents to have a
higher chance of dictionary matches. In response to these
limitations, Nguyen et al. (2024) introduced mformer, a
transformer-based tool for extracting MFT dimensions from
text. This tool outputs a number in a range from 0 to 1 for
each moral dimension. It has shown superior performance
compared to dictionary-based, embedding-based, and super-
vised classification methods. We employed mformer as our
reference computational model for extracting moral founda-
tions from MFT. To address potential biases in interpreting
standalone moral foundation scores, we implemented a scal-
ing process using a baseline dataset.
Methodological Framework
We aim to explore the interplay between narrative types in
vegan-related videos and the levels of user engagement in
collective action shown in the comments corresponding to
these videos. To do so, we devised a three-step computa-
tional framework, illustrated in Figure 1. First, we collected
and processed YouTube videos and associated comments.
Second, we mapped video content to narrative types based
on the moral vegan ideology framework, thus obtaining dis-
tinct narrative clusters. Third and last, we associated these
narrative clusters with audience reactions, specifically by in-
vestigating the presence of linguistic markers of collective
action within video comments. To better interpret the rela-
tionship between the narrative clusters and their correspond-
ing comments, we measured how much narratives are clus-
tered in the semantic space, and we analyzed the alignment
between the semantics of the video content and that of the
corresponding comments.
Data Collection
We used the YouTube API to analyze discussions related
to three plant-based challenges gathering about 800k offi-
1222


comments video1
comments video2
Content coherence
Collective action
Narrative-reaction 
alignment
Figure 1: Methodological framework.
Keywords
Veganuary
veganuary, #veganuary,
#veganuaryYEAR, #Veganuary,
#vegan, #Vegan, vegan
Meatless
March
meatless march, #meatlessmarch,
#MeatlessMarch, meatless
No Meat
May
no meat may, #nomeatmay,
#NoMeatMay, vegan, #vegan, #Vegan
Table 2: Keywords used for the data collection by initiative.
cially registered participants worldwide: Veganuary, Meat-
less March, and No Meat May. Our selection criteria were
driven by the widespread participation and popularity of Ve-
ganuary, the leading challenge in this domain. In addition,
we considered Meatless March, and No Meat May as they
are analogous time-constrained initiatives that enjoy a sub-
stantial level of public interest. Our data retrieval spanned
videos posted on the platform during the three months cen-
tered on the reference month for each challenge, covering
a 10-year period from December 2013 to June 2023. We
started the collection process by considering the lower-cased
names of the movements as a primary keyword (i.e., veg-
anuary, meatless march, no meat may) and performed an
expansion taking the relevant hashtags that were most of-
ten co-occurring with them. In practice, we first queried the
API using the seed keywords, extracted the ten most fre-
quent keywords in the descriptions of the set of retrieved
videos, and manually selected those that were semantically
relevant to the challenge. The final sets of keywords are in
Table 2.
We retrieved a total of 12,753 contributions with more
than 5M comments. Appendix A provides a yearly break-
down of the data volume for the data of each challenge.
To analyze video content, we leveraged video transcripts.
We filtered the set of videos to retain only English content,
achieved through the langdetect tool for language de-
tection transposed from Java in Python (Shuyo 2010). A sub-
set of videos had the auto-caption option enabled by their
creators and thus we were able to retrieve their transcript
through the Youtube Transcript package (Depoix
2023). To complete the dataset, we employed the Whisper
audio-to-text converter to obtain the missing data (Radford
et al. 2023). This tool has demonstrated performance com-
parable to humans in terms of Word Error Rate in long-form
transcription tasks.
To ensure the selection of pertinent content that could ef-
fectively be mapped to theory-defined narratives and evoke
specific collective reactions, we employed Latent Dirich-
let Allocation (LDA) (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003) for topic
modeling and conducted a manual inspection of the results.
To weed out irrelevant content from the rest, we ran LDA
with two as the number of topics, we identified the ten most
common words per topic and examined the top-5 most rep-
resentative video transcripts for each topic. We observed that
one topic predominantly revolved around recipes and ingre-
dients, showing no relevance to the moral vegan ideology
theory, while the other delved into plant-based challenges
and their associated ethical aspects. In our narrative map-
ping approach, the emphasis lies on achieving high precision
rather than high recall. This entails prioritizing the accurate
identification of pertinent elements, even at the expense of
potentially overlooking some less relevant ones. As such, we
filtered out recipe-focused videos (i.e. one of the retrieved
topics) reaching a total volume of 3,547 data points, 1,801 of
which have at least one comment with more than five unique
words.
Generally speaking, our pre-processing steps were kept
minimal, involving the exclusion of transcripts with fewer
than five unique words and the removal of text marked with
music tags indicating musical pieces within a YouTube tran-
script. Table 3 summarizes the filtering steps and resulting
data volumes.
For each of the three challenges, we gathered a baseline
set of videos. These videos served us as a benchmark for
re-scaling the metrics calculated on the target video set. To
select the baseline, we identified the most frequent YouTube
video category for each challenge. Within such categories,
we then collected a set of videos of a size similar to the
1223


Original
English
With
transcript
Valid
topic
Valid
comments
12,753
11,854
8,954
(YouTube)
3,547
1,801
2,399
(Whisper)
Table 3: Video data volume by filtering step. Filters are ap-
plied in series, left to right.
target set (see Appendix A) and within the same reference
timeframe, without applying any keyword filter.
Last, we gathered the comments corresponding to
our
final
set
of
videos.
Specifically,
we
used
the
CommentThreads method in the YouTube API to gather
up to 1000 comments and first-level replies for each video.
We collected the most recent comments because, at the time
of writing, the YouTube API does not allow for retriev-
ing a random sample of comments. In total, we collected
516,207 comments on YouTube, which were further refined
to 416,736 after simple pre-processing (removing mentions
and URLs, and filtering out comments with fewer than five
unique words).
Narratives Mapping
To map videos to narrative types defined by the moral vegan
ideology, we first grouped content by measuring the level of
collective identity expressed in the transcripts (Eq. 1). We
grouped videos into communal-oriented (CI index ≤0.4)
and agency-oriented (CI index ≥0.6). We discarded the set
of videos with CI index scores between 0.4 and 0.6, as they
could not be strongly characterized according to this the-
oretical dimension. We applied mformer to the remaining
3,045 videos to extract their moral foundation scores. To find
clusters of narrative types, we used UMAP (McInnes, Healy,
and Melville 2018) to reduce the scores to a 2-dimensional
space, and finally applied the HDBSCAN clustering algo-
rithm (Campello, Moulavi, and Sander 2013).
We defined optimal HDBSCAN parameters by optimiz-
ing the Density Based Cluster Validity (DBCV) (Moulavi
et
al.
2014)
through
a
random
search:
we
set
min sample
=
15, min cluster size
=
15,
and
metric
=
manhattan
for
the
communal-
oriented group of videos and min sample
=
15,
min cluster size = 150, and metric = euclidean
for agency-oriented one.
We employed manual annotation to validate the result-
ing video content clusters. Acknowledging the utility of
open-source models like Llama-2 (Touvron et al. 2023) in
aiding human annotators in the classification of social sci-
ence concepts (Ziems et al. 2023), we considered Llama-
2 70B Chat as an initial supporting tool. For each clus-
ter in the communal-oriented and agency-oriented groups,
we selected the top 30 videos closest to the cluster cen-
troid and prompted the language model to label each tran-
script within this subset according to the most relevant nar-
rative type, if discernible. We defined narrative types for
each identity group in the prompt and instructed it to out-
put “other” in cases of uncertainty (refer to Appendix B for
prompt descriptions). Notably, we observed a tendency of
the LLM to predominantly output a single label per collec-
tive identity group (e.g., “duty to educate” in the communal-
oriented group and “right to good health” in the agency-
oriented one), likely influenced by its internal knowledge
bias. Given such a first initial guideline, we engaged in man-
ual inspection of transcripts within the top-30 videos subset.
This step allowed us to label each cluster and qualitatively
define the theme characterizing each narrative group based
on sub-categories extracted from the theory, described in Ta-
ble 1. Data volume for each annotated narrative group can be
found in Appendix A.
Collective Action Expressions
We identified expressions promoting collective action within
YouTube comments, aiming to quantify the relationship be-
tween these linguistic indicators and various narrative types.
This analysis was inspired by theories of normative align-
ment, which propose that narratives advocating social and
political action are crucial in igniting and sustaining collec-
tive initiatives (Thomas, McGarty, and Mavor 2009).
To further enrich our understanding of collective action
markers, we incorporated two additional semantic similarity
measures that previous research has associated with collec-
tive action. First, we measured the semantic coherence of
videos within a narrative group, as consistent narratives can
better foster a shared identity among community members,
facilitating collective action efforts (Blair and Jost 2003;
Van Zomeren, Postmes, and Spears 2008). Second, we mea-
sured the semantic alignment between the content of a video
and its corresponding comments as a proxy for agreement
between influential leaders and activists, which is typically
associated with successful collective movements (Thomas,
McGarty, and Mavor 2009). Last, we fit an Ordinary Least
Squares (OLS) regression to determine whether the variabil-
ity in collective action responses to videos is significantly
associated with the moral features emerging from them, the
semantic coherence with videos’ reference narratives, and
the video-comments alignment.
Operationalization of Collective Action
Aiming at the
definition of a standalone measure of collective action on
textual traces, Smith, McGarty, and Thomas (2018) formu-
lated and validated a collective action dictionary compris-
ing 47 terms, designed in a LIWC-like fashion (Pennebaker
et al. 2015). We used this dictionary to extract collective ac-
tion instances through a wildcard match of words in com-
ments. We then computed the relative frequency of collec-
tive action words in each comment and evaluated the distri-
bution within narrative types.
Content Coherence
To gauge the semantic consistency of
a narrative type, we evaluated the silhouette score for each
video within it, using S-BERT embeddings (Reimers and
Gurevych 2019) (all-MiniLM-L6-v2 model) of video
transcripts. The embedding model, trained on sentence-level
data, demonstrates strong performance across various natu-
ral language processing downstream tasks. Nonetheless, its
1224


(a) Communal-oriented.
(b) Agency-oriented.
Figure 2: Clusters of videos and their mapping to the moral vegan ideology framework.
Narrative
Transcript excerpts
Educate
(inform)
Spanish startup creates 3D printed vegan meat. An Italian bioengineer at a Spanish startup
claims to have invented the world’s first vegan steak made using 3D printing technology...
Educate
(inspire)
I’m Matthew Glover, I’m the co-founder of Veganuary... we started it in 2013 we’ve had
four campaigns now. In the first year January 2014 we have 3,300 people taking part and
we’ve been doubling in size or slightly more...
Fight
(protest)
...which is why we started this campaign a couple of months ago so um this is an example
of a protest we’re doing, all of our protests are not quite as destructive as this one...
Fight
(convert)
In the afternoon of August 26th 2011, we decided to stop paying other people to kill
animals for us to eat... We decided to stop exploiting animals for clothing, entertainment,
testing, and all other purposes...
Good health
(personal stories)
Being a vegan bodybuilder is really tough. If you’re one or want to become one, my hat is
off to you because it’s really tough...
Choose
(personal stories)
I’m not a vegan. Look, man, I’m really proud of you. Cause going vegan is not something
that I could do. You make it seem so simple as if I could choose...
Good health
(benefits)
Hey this is Ryan of happy healthy vegan. So I just got back results for my latest blood
test and I’m gonna share with you right now my testosterone levels...
Choose
(discuss)
If you’ve ever had a conversation with a vegan, especially if the vegan is someone you’re
close to, you know that things can get heated pretty quickly...
Table 4: Representative examples of YouTube video transcripts for each narrative cluster.
effectiveness may fluctuate when handling very large doc-
uments, often due to truncation issues. The silhouette score
is a widely-used metric to evaluate cluster quality, and mea-
sures the similarity of a datapoint with others in its own clus-
ter compared to the similarity with points in other clusters.
The distribution of silhouette scores across videos associated
with a given narrative type assesses the content coherence of
such videos in terms of their placement in the specific narra-
tive cluster.
Narrative-Reaction Alignment
Although our study is
solely observational and does not definitively establish a
causal link between video content and public reaction,
the nature of video-sharing platforms, which are centered
around content, provides creators with a degree of influence
over emerging topics in public discourse. Thus, we can study
the ability of communicators to steer the audience’s opinion
by analyzing the relationship between published content and
related reactions. This relationship can provide insights into
the emergence of collective action initiatives within the re-
actions. We considered a video-comment alignment metric
based on the cosine similarity of pairs of videos and com-
ments S-BERT embeddings. Given Ci = (ci1, ci2, ..., cil)
comments to video vi, vi S-BERT vector of vi, and Ci aver-
age S-BERT vector of Ci, the metric can be defined as:
video-comment alignment(vi) = cos(Ci, vi)
(2)
Results
Narratives
Using the Collective Identity index (Eq. 1), we identified 389
communal and 2,656 agency-oriented videos. Within each
group, the clustering on the UMAP-reduced dimensions of
the Moral Foundations Theory (MFT) resulted in four clus-
ters, as shown in Figure 2. We aligned each cluster with
1225


Figure 3: Moral dimensions scores for communal-oriented
narratives (top) and agency-oriented narratives (bottom).
Scores are discounted by the scores calculated on a control
set of videos, and then standardized.
theory-defined narrative types through manual assessment.
Table 4 summarizes the labeling of narratives and provides
a video transcript example for each of them. We also char-
acterized each narrative based on the distribution of MFT
scores of their respective videos (Figure 3).
Within the communal-oriented narratives, two clusters
were associated with the duty to educate narrative. The first
primarily focuses on information sharing, embodying the
creator’s role as a “conveyor of knowledge” (educate (in-
form)). Videos within this cluster exhibit a marked charac-
ter of news-like dissemination, therefore their transcripts do
not generally show high levels in any MFT dimension. The
second cluster emphasizes the inspirational aspect of story-
telling, motivating others to start their journey toward vegan-
ism or persist in their pursuit (educate (inspire)). Its videos
exhibit higher levels of loyalty compared to other clusters,
reflecting the feeling of “one for all and all for one” typi-
cal of that narrative type. The remaining two clusters were
linked to the duty to fight narrative. The first expresses the in-
tent to persuade others to act towards broader global change
(fight (convert)), and it is characterized by a high level of the
fairness MFT dimension, which is linked to the evolution-
ary process of reciprocal altruism (Brosnan and De Waal
2002). The latter promotes active participation in protests
and lobbying to attain climate objectives (fight (protest)),
and does so by expressing high levels of the authority di-
mension, which stresses the values of leadership and follow-
ership.
Within agency-oriented narratives, two clusters refer to
concepts typical of right-to-good-health narratives: em-
phasizing personal experiences and transformations (good
health (personal stories)) and praising the physical and men-
tal health benefits of plant-based diets (good health (bene-
fits)). The MFT dimensions for these two clusters are not
particularly distinctive, with scores for most dimensions be-
ing at the baseline level. The remaining two clusters are
semantically associated with the right-to-choose narrative,
and address the need for broadening the societal acceptance
of veganism. The first cluster does so by sharing personal
stories (choose (personal stories)), which exhibit on aver-
age high scores of the loyalty dimension being linked to the
moral’s defining sense of self-sacrifice. The second cluster
encourages instead informed discussions (choose (discuss))
Figure 4: Relative frequency of collective action markers in
comments by narrative type.
(a) Silhouette score.
(b) Video-comment align.
Figure 5: Content coherence and narrative-reaction align-
ment by narrative type.
and the language used in its videos is high on the fairness
dimension, highlighting the virtues of justice and rights.
Collective Action in Reactions
We examined the frequency of words associated with col-
lective action in comments on videos across narrative groups
(Figure 4). We observed a variation in the frequency of these
linguistic markers across narratives, with the highest fre-
quency in videos that fell under the fight (convert) narrative.
Appendix C reports some examples of comments character-
ized by high levels of collective action.
We further investigated the relationship between the fre-
quency of commitment markers, video content coherence
within narrative groups, and narrative-reaction alignment
(Eq. 2). The narratives within the fight (convert) and choose
(discuss) clusters demonstrated the highest overall levels of
semantic consistency (Figure 5, left). These two narratives
were found to occupy a narrow semantic area in the embed-
ding space, as shown by the UMAP projections of the S-
BERT embeddings of the video transcripts (Figure 6). We
1226


(a) Fight (convert).
(b) Choose (discuss).
Figure 6: UMAP projections of S-BERT video embeddings
of all videos, with videos belonging to two narrative types
highlighted in red.
assessed whether the high semantic coherence of certain
narrative types translated into a strong semantic alignment
between content and reactions (Figure 5). The fight (con-
vert) and choose (discuss) narratives were characterized by
a slightly higher similarity between videos and correspond-
ing comments compared to other clusters. Overall, our find-
ings suggest a correlation between content semantic consis-
tency and the capacity of some narratives to attract reactions
aligned with video content.
The observed macro-level association between collective
action indicators, narrative types, semantic coherence of
content, and alignment of comments to videos, raises the
question of whether the frequency of collective action men-
tions in comments on individual videos can be inferred from
these factors. To address this, we employed an Ordinary
Least Squares (OLS) model, using individual videos as the
unit of analysis, to predict the degree of commitment based
on moral foundations scores, semantic coherence between
videos and narrative groups, and video-comment alignment.
We also factored in the number of comments on each video
as a control variable to account for the video’s popularity and
the content creator’s influence. The model was applied after
adjusting skewed predictors and calculating the z-scores of
all variables, as summarized in Table 5. Despite the inher-
ent challenge in predicting comment commitment variabil-
ity at the individual video level, we identified several regres-
sion coefficients of statistical significance (p-values ≤0.1).
Specifically, a smaller audience size, higher semantic coher-
ence between content and narrative type, and a discourse
more focused on group self-sacrifice (key characteristics of
the loyalty moral dimension) were significantly correlated
with increased collective action in responses.
Discussion and Conclusion
In pursuit of evaluating the influence of online storytelling
on collective action initiatives, specifically within the con-
text of climate action, we analyzed YouTube content related
to three popular challenges aimed at promoting awareness
about plant-based diets: Veganuary, Meatless March, and No
Meat May.
We developed the first operationalization of a theoretical
Variable
Coefficient
p-value
const
1.16e-17
1.000
n. comments (log)
-0.059
0.025**
video-comment
alignment (log)
0.015
0.576
silhouette (log)
0.047
0.066*
care score
-0.034
0.292
fairness score (sqrt)
0.024
0.416
loyalty score (sqrt)
0.051
0.053*
authority score (sqrt)
-0.027
0.329
sanctity score (sqrt)
0.025
0.428
R2 = 0.008
Table 5: OLS regression coefficients to predict the fraction
of comments containing linguistic markers of collective ac-
tion.
framework that formalizes six moral narratives within the
vegan ideology, and mapped YouTube videos to these sto-
rytelling types (RQ1). For communal-oriented narratives, a
clear mapping emerged for the theoretical concepts of “duty
to educate” and “duty to fight”, while “duty to care” was less
distinct in the reference videos. The “duty to educate” narra-
tive frequently surfaced during annotation, likely because of
the news-like communication tone of many YouTube vlogs.
The distinction between agency-oriented narrative types was
more nuanced. The narrative of the “right to good health”
was often present, even blending with other narrative types,
suggesting a tendency to emphasize the benefits of plant-
based diets. The “right to choose” narrative also appeared
frequently, while the “right to inner peace” narrative was less
common.
Building on the relationship between public narratives
and collective action explored in previous theoretical litera-
ture, we investigated the connection between narrative types
and linguistic markers indicative of collective action in video
comments. Narratives advocating for a duty to fight and con-
vert others to the veganism cause elicited the highest level of
collective action responses (RQ2). Overall, we found that a
smaller audience, greater content coherence of videos with
their narrative group, and discourse expressing higher levels
of the “loyalty” moral foundation were significantly associ-
ated with increased collective action (RQ3). These findings
align with established research in the social sciences. The
seminal work of Olson Jr (1971) posited an inverse relation-
ship between the probability of collective action and group
size. Moreover, the coherence of content within its desig-
nated narrative can cultivate a shared identity among com-
munity members, thus fostering more effective collective ac-
tion efforts (Blair and Jost 2003; Van Zomeren, Postmes, and
Spears 2008). Additionally, (Willer 2009) emphasize the in-
tricate relationship between collective action, the benefits
accrued within groups (such as status), and the notion of
self-sacrifice for the greater collective—a fundamental as-
pect of the “loyalty” moral foundation. These insights con-
tribute to a nuanced understanding of the dynamics that drive
collective action within the context of the proposed analysis.
While our study provides novel quantitative insights into
1227


the relationship between narratives and collective action, it
has limitations that open up avenues for future research. Pri-
marily, the vegan narrative framework we employed is inher-
ently tailored to its specific topic, as defined within the ex-
isting literature. Nonetheless, its structured and clear outline,
rooted in collective identity and moral perspectives, presents
the opportunity for expansion into other contexts involving
lifestyle choices. Other issues arise from the limited amount
of data involved in the final steps of the study. Notably, our
data pre-processing pipeline retained only 24% of the ini-
tial 12,753 videos potentially relevant to the veganism dis-
course. This was due to several filtering steps aimed at pri-
oritizing precision over recall. Most notably, we excluded
video-recipes and all videos not heavily characterized on the
Collective Identity axis of our reference theory. Our opera-
tionalization covered only a subset of the narratives origi-
nally formulated by the theory, which could be due to these
filtering steps or to the limited applicability of the theory
to the specific context of YouTube. Another limitation per-
tains to the complex nature of the concepts characterizing
the narratives and the public response they received. Despite
using validated tools, the inherent ambiguity and complex-
ity of some of the key theoretical notions we base our work
on may have introduced noise in the final mapping between
empirical clusters of videos and theoretical narratives. Last,
the observed collective action in response to narrative con-
tent does not necessarily translate to offline participation in
social movements, as social media often fosters a form of
activism known as “slacktivism” (Morozov 2009).
Despite these constraints, our study successfully captures
the existence of nuances in pro-environmental storytelling
and discerns variations in the type of engagement that dif-
ferent narrative types receive.
Related Work
Extensive exploration within social science literature has
elucidated the profound impact of discourse framing on col-
lective social processes, particularly within the development
of social movements. Polletta (1998) identified three dynam-
ics of collective action where stories play pivotal roles, in-
cluding “stories of origin”, “stories of defeat” and “stories
of victory”. Davis (2002) expanded on this by highlighting
the interactive exchange process inherent in narrative frame-
works, emphasizing the crucial role of audiences in shaping
and responding to stories, with a focus on social identity as-
pects.
Environmental social movements, the main target of our
research, have been often examined through the lens of nar-
rative networks, emphasizing the connection between sto-
ries and the social networks formed in the context of en-
vironmental protection (Lejano, Ingram, and Ingram 2013).
Within this setting, climate change-specific narratives have
been categorized into “lifeboat” and “collective” types, re-
flecting dichotomies between self-interest and shared pur-
pose within communities (Fiskio 2012). The theoretical
framework by Napoli and Ouschan (2020), a key reference
for our work, further enriched this collective identity-based
description of environmental narratives by focusing on the
vegan movement and adding nuances of morality. This per-
spective has been further corroborated by later experimental
work (Waters 2022; Aavik 2023).
While numerous contributions exist within the field of
Narrative Analysis that extract narratives from textual traces
using Natural Language Processing (NLP) tools (Bandeli,
Hussain, and Agarwal 2020; Debnath et al. 2020; Ranade
et al. 2022), the link between computational methods and
narrative types discussed in social science literature is still
under-explored (Piper, So, and Bamman 2021). Notable ex-
ceptions include the work of Vu et al. (2021), who extracted
framing ingredients of climate change-related protest mes-
sages, operationalizing concepts such as impacts, action, and
efficacy (Benford and Snow 2000) through mention counts.
Shifting the focus to the operationalization of collec-
tive action, the literature presents a richer landscape, often
examined through network science lenses (Lucchini et al.
2022). Approaches involving textual analysis, particularly
the use of recurrent expressions (Berlin 2008; Fetzer 2008),
present challenges especially when applied to social me-
dia comments. Research has also explored machine learn-
ing tools to extract linguistic markers hinting at collective
action from text (Wang, Cutler, and Culotta 2017; Zhang
and Pan 2019; Li et al. 2023), yet the domain-specific na-
ture of these approaches limits their general applicability.
In the realm of dictionary-based methods for collective ac-
tion measurement, studies have commonly focused on col-
lective identity, emotions, and collective or participatory ef-
ficacy as predictors (Van Zomeren, Postmes, and Spears
2008; Van Zomeren, Saguy, and Schellhaas 2013; Rand,
Kraft-Todd, and Gruber 2015; Bamberg, Rees, and Seebauer
2015; Van Zomeren, Pauls, and Cohen-Chen 2019; Hamann
and Reese 2020; Furlong and Vignoles 2021; Brown, Low-
ery, and Smith 2022; Judge, Fernando, and Begeny 2022;
Thomas et al. 2022). Some have aimed to define computa-
tional measures for these elements from text, often resort-
ing to LIWC categories (Gulliver, Fielding, and Louis 2021;
Suitner et al. 2023). Within this group of works, Smith, Mc-
Garty, and Thomas (2018) introduced a collective action dic-
tionary, defined in a LIWC-like fashion, which served as a
valuable resource for our analysis.
Ethical Considerations
Given
that
YouTube
content
is
predominantly
user-
generated and largely unmoderated, the narratives we exam-
ined may contain messages that do not necessarily advocate
for veganism and climate action in an ethical or respectful
manner. Our study adopted a broad view of the public dis-
course on YouTube, without attempting to categorize con-
tent that may contain misinformation or potentially harm-
ful expressions. We underscore the importance of address-
ing the potential ethical implications associated with unreg-
ulated online spaces.
We recognize the potential misuse of our framework,
which could be exploited to inform strategies of misinfor-
mation and propaganda. Despite acknowledging the risks of
certain aspects being leveraged to create tools and strategies
with detrimental societal implications, we are dedicated to
minimizing such risks. Our motivation is grounded in the
1228


belief that our work can positively contribute to addressing
pressing social dilemmas, particularly those related to cli-
mate change.
The dataset associated with this paper complies with
the FAIR principles (FORCE11 2020), as outlined in the
DataSheet (Supplementary Material).
Code and Data Availability
All code used for the experiments and information about
the videos examined, in terms of narrative orientations,
statistics, metrics specific to this paper, reference baseline
videos, and comments retrieved and analyzed is available on
a GitHub repository1.
Acknowledgments
We acknowledge the support from the Carlsberg Foundation
through the COCOONS project (CF21-0432). The funder
had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, de-
cision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
References
Aavik, K. 2023. Going Vegan: Understanding Men’s Ve-
gan Transition Narratives.
In Contesting Anthropocentric
Masculinities Through Veganism: Lived Experiences of Ve-
gan Men, 33–68. Springer.
Araque, O.; Gatti, L.; and Kalimeri, K. 2020.
Moral-
Strength: Exploiting a moral lexicon and embedding simi-
larity for moral foundations prediction. Knowledge-based
systems, 191: 105184.
Bamberg, S.; Rees, J.; and Seebauer, S. 2015. Collective
climate action: Determinants of participation intention in
community-based pro-environmental initiatives. Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 43: 155–165.
Bandeli, K. K.; Hussain, M. N.; and Agarwal, N. 2020. A
Framework towards Computational Narrative Analysis on
Blogs. In Text2Story@ ECIR, 63–69.
Benford, R. D.; and Snow, D. A. 2000. Framing processes
and social movements: An overview and assessment. Annual
review of sociology, 26(1): 611–639.
Berlin, L. N. 2008. “I Think, Therefore...” Commitment in
Political Testimony. Journal of Language and Social Psy-
chology, 27(4): 372–383.
Blair, I. V.; and Jost, J. T. 2003. Exit, loyalty, and collective
action among workers in a simulated business environment:
Interactive effects of group identification and boundary per-
meability. Social Justice Research, 16: 95–108.
Blei, D. M.; Ng, A. Y.; and Jordan, M. I. 2003. Latent dirich-
let allocation. Journal of machine Learning research, 3(Jan):
993–1022.
Brosnan, S. F.; and De Waal, F. B. 2002. A proximate per-
spective on reciprocal altruism. Human Nature, 13: 129–
152.
1https://github.com/ariannap13/VeganCollectiveAction
Brown, O.; Lowery, C.; and Smith, L. G. 2022. How op-
posing ideological groups use online interactions to justify
and mobilise collective action. European Journal of Social
Psychology, 52(7): 1082–1110.
Campello, R. J.; Moulavi, D.; and Sander, J. 2013. Density-
based clustering based on hierarchical density estimates. In
Pacific-Asia conference on knowledge discovery and data
mining, 160–172. Springer.
Cuddy, A. J.; Fiske, S. T.; and Glick, P. 2008. Warmth and
competence as universal dimensions of social perception:
The stereotype content model and the BIAS map. Advances
in experimental social psychology, 40: 61–149.
Davis, J. E. 2002. Narrative and social movements. Stories
of change: Narrative and social movements, 3–29.
Debnath, R.; Darby, S.; Bardhan, R.; Mohaddes, K.; and
Sunikka-Blank, M. 2020. Grounded reality meets machine
learning: A deep-narrative analysis framework for energy
policy research.
Energy research & social science, 69:
101704.
Decter-Frain, A.; and Frimer, J. A. 2016. Impressive words:
linguistic predictors of public approval of the US congress.
Frontiers in psychology, 7: 240.
Depoix, J. 2023. Youtube Transcript API. https://github.
com/jdepoix/youtube-transcript-api. Accessed: 2023-12-01.
Fernandez, M.; Burel, G.; Alani, H.; Piccolo, L. S. G.; Meili,
C.; and Hess, R. 2015. Analysing engagement towards the
2014 earth hour campaign in twitter.
Fetzer, A. 2008. “And I Think That Is a Very Straightforward
Way of Dealing With It” The Communicative Function of
Cognitive Verbs in Political Discourse. Journal of Language
and Social Psychology, 27(4): 384–396.
Fiskio, J. 2012.
Apocalypse and ecotopia: narratives in
global climate change discourse.
Race, Gender & Class,
12–36.
FORCE11. 2020. The FAIR Data principles. https://force11.
org/info/the-fair-data-principles/. Accessed: 2024-01-05.
Frimer, J. A.; and Walker, L. J. 2009. Reconciling the self
and morality: An empirical model of moral centrality devel-
opment. Developmental Psychology, 45(6): 1669.
Furlong, C.; and Vignoles, V. L. 2021.
Social identifica-
tion in collective climate activism: Predicting participation
in the environmental movement, extinction rebellion. Iden-
tity, 21(1): 20–35.
Gebru, T.; Morgenstern, J.; Vecchione, B.; Vaughan, J. W.;
Wallach, H.; Iii, H. D.; and Crawford, K. 2021. Datasheets
for datasets. Communications of the ACM, 64(12): 86–92.
Graham, J.; Haidt, J.; Koleva, S.; Motyl, M.; Iyer, R.; Woj-
cik, S. P.; and Ditto, P. H. 2013. Moral foundations theory:
The pragmatic validity of moral pluralism. In Advances in
experimental social psychology, volume 47, 55–130. Else-
vier.
Gulliver, R.; Fielding, K. S.; and Louis, W. R. 2021. As-
sessing the mobilization potential of environmental advo-
cacy communication. Journal of Environmental Psychology,
74: 101563.
1229


Hamann, K. R.; and Reese, G. 2020. My influence on the
world (of others): Goal efficacy beliefs and efficacy affect
predict private, public, and activist pro-environmental be-
havior. Journal of Social Issues, 76(1): 35–53.
Hou, J. Z. 2023. “Sharing Is Caring”: Participatory Story-
telling and Community Building on Social Media Amidst
the COVID-19 Pandemic. American Behavioral Scientist,
00027642231164040.
Jennings, F. J.; Suzuki, V. P.; and Hubbard, A. 2021. Social
media and democracy: Fostering political deliberation and
participation.
Western Journal of Communication, 85(2):
147–167.
Johnston, H.; and Noakes, J. A. 2005. Frames of protest:
Social movements and the framing perspective. Rowman &
Littlefield Publishers.
Judge, M.; Fernando, J. W.; and Begeny, C. T. 2022. Dietary
behaviour as a form of collective action: A social identity
model of vegan activism. Appetite, 168: 105730.
Lejano, R.; Ingram, M.; and Ingram, H. 2013. The power of
narrative in environmental networks. MIT Press.
Li, Y.; Frans, V. F.; Song, Y.; Cai, M.; Zhang, Y.; and Liu, J.
2023. SDGdetector: an R-based text mining tool for quanti-
fying efforts toward Sustainable Development Goals. Jour-
nal of Open Source Software, 8(84): 5124.
Lucchini, L.; Aiello, L. M.; Alessandretti, L.; De Fran-
cisci Morales, G.; Starnini, M.; and Baronchelli, A. 2022.
From Reddit to Wall Street: The role of committed minori-
ties in financial collective action. Royal Society Open Sci-
ence, 9(4): 211488.
Lund, N. F.; Cohen, S. A.; and Scarles, C. 2018. The power
of social media storytelling in destination branding. Journal
of destination marketing & management, 8: 271–280.
Masson-Delmotte, V.; P¨ortner, H.-O.; Skea, J.; Zhai, P.;
Roberts, D.; Shukla, P. R.; Buend´ıa, E. C.; et al. 2019. Cli-
mate Change and Land: an IPCC special report on climate
change, desertification, land degradation, sustainable land
management, food security, and greenhouse gas fluxes in ter-
restrial ecosystems.
Mavrodieva, A. V.; Rachman, O. K.; Harahap, V. B.; and
Shaw, R. 2019. Role of social media as a soft power tool
in raising public awareness and engagement in addressing
climate change. Climate, 7(10): 122.
McInnes, L.; Healy, J.; and Melville, J. 2018. Umap: Uni-
form manifold approximation and projection for dimension
reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426.
Monti, C.; Aiello, L. M.; De Francisci Morales, G.; and
Bonchi, F. 2022. The language of opinion change on social
media under the lens of communicative action. Scientific
Reports, 12(1): 17920.
Morozov, E. 2009. The brave new world of slacktivism. For-
eign policy, 19(05).
Moulavi, D.; Jaskowiak, P. A.; Campello, R. J.; Zimek, A.;
and Sander, J. 2014. Density-based clustering validation. In
Proceedings of the 2014 SIAM international conference on
data mining, 839–847. SIAM.
Napoli, J.; and Ouschan, R. 2020. Vegan stories: Revealing
archetypes and their moral foundations. Qualitative Market
Research: An International Journal, 23(1): 145–169.
Nguyen, T. D.; Chen, Z.; Carroll, N. G.; Tran, A.; Klein, C.;
and Xie, L. 2024. Measuring Moral Dimensions in Social
Media with Mformer. In Proceedings of the International
AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media.
Nisbet, M. C.; and Newman, T. P. 2015. Framing, the media,
and environmental communication. In The Routledge hand-
book of environment and communication, 345–358. Rout-
ledge.
Olson Jr, M. 1971. The Logic of Collective Action: Public
Goods and the Theory of Groups, with a new preface and
appendix, volume 124. Harvard University Press.
Pelletier, L. G.; and Sharp, E. 2008. Persuasive communi-
cation and proenvironmental behaviours: how message tai-
loring and message framing can improve the integration of
behaviours through self-determined motivation. Canadian
Psychology/Psychologie Canadienne, 49(3): 210.
Pennebaker, J.; Booth, R.; Boyd, R.; and Francis, M. 2015.
Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count: LIWC2015.
Piper, A.; So, R. J.; and Bamman, D. 2021. Narrative theory
for computational narrative understanding. In Proceedings
of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, 298–311.
Polletta, F. 1998.
Contending stories: Narrative in social
movements. Qualitative sociology, 21: 419–446.
Radford, A.; Kim, J. W.; Xu, T.; Brockman, G.; McLeavey,
C.; and Sutskever, I. 2023. Robust speech recognition via
large-scale weak supervision. In International Conference
on Machine Learning, 28492–28518. PMLR.
Ranade, P.; Dey, S.; Joshi, A.; and Finin, T. 2022. Computa-
tional understanding of narratives: A survey. IEEE Access,
10: 101575–101594.
Rand, D. G.; Kraft-Todd, G.; and Gruber, J. 2015. The col-
lective benefits of feeling good and letting go: Positive emo-
tion and (dis) inhibition interact to predict cooperative be-
havior. PloS one, 10(1): e0117426.
Reimers, N.; and Gurevych, I. 2019. Sentence-bert: Sen-
tence embeddings using siamese bert-networks.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1908.10084.
Schmitt, M. T.; Mackay, C. M.; Droogendyk, L. M.; and
Payne, D. 2019. What predicts environmental activism? The
roles of identification with nature and politicized environ-
mental identity. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 61:
20–29.
Seargeant, P. 2020. The art of political storytelling: Why sto-
ries win votes in post-truth politics. Bloomsbury Publishing.
Shuyo, N. 2010. Language Detection Library for Java.
Smith, L. G.; McGarty, C.; and Thomas, E. F. 2018. After
Aylan Kurdi: How tweeting about death, threat, and harm
predict increased expressions of solidarity with refugees
over time. Psychological science, 29(4): 623–634.
Suitner, C.; Badia, L.; Clementel, D.; Iacovissi, L.; Miglior-
ini, M.; Casara, B. G. S.; Solimini, D.; Formanowicz, M.;
1230


and Erseghe, T. 2023.
The rise of# climateaction in the
time of the FridaysForFuture movement: A semantic net-
work analysis. Social Networks, 75: 170–185.
Thomas, E. F.; Duncan, L.; McGarty, C.; Louis, W. R.; and
Smith, L. G. 2022. MOBILISE: a higher-order integration
of collective action research to address global challenges.
Political Psychology, 43: 107–164.
Thomas, E. F.; McGarty, C.; and Mavor, K. I. 2009. Align-
ing identities, emotions, and beliefs to create commitment
to sustainable social and political action. Personality and
social psychology review, 13(3): 194–218.
Torelli, R.; Balluchi, F.; and Lazzini, A. 2020. Greenwash-
ing and environmental communication: Effects on stake-
holders’ perceptions.
Business strategy and the Environ-
ment, 29(2): 407–421.
Touvron, H.; Martin, L.; Stone, K.; Albert, P.; Almahairi, A.;
Babaei, Y.; Bashlykov, N.; Batra, S.; Bhargava, P.; Bhosale,
S.; et al. 2023. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned
chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288.
Uldam, J.; and Askanius, T. 2013. Online civic cultures? De-
bating climate change activism on YouTube. International
Journal of Communication, 7.
Van Zomeren, M.; Pauls, I. L.; and Cohen-Chen, S. 2019.
Is hope good for motivating collective action in the con-
text of climate change? Differentiating hope’s emotion-and
problem-focused coping functions. Global Environmental
Change, 58: 101915.
Van Zomeren, M.; Postmes, T.; and Spears, R. 2008. Toward
an integrative social identity model of collective action: a
quantitative research synthesis of three socio-psychological
perspectives. Psychological bulletin, 134(4): 504.
Van Zomeren, M.; Saguy, T.; and Schellhaas, F. M. 2013.
Believing in “making a difference” to collective efforts: Par-
ticipative efficacy beliefs as a unique predictor of collec-
tive action. Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 16(5):
618–634.
veganuary.com. 2023. Veganuary 2023 Participants Survey.
Vu, H. T.; Blomberg, M.; Seo, H.; Liu, Y.; Shayesteh, F.; and
Do, H. V. 2021. Social media and environmental activism:
Framing climate change on Facebook by global NGOs. Sci-
ence communication, 43(1): 91–115.
Wang, Z.; Cutler, J.; and Culotta, A. 2017. Are words com-
mensurate with actions? quantifying commitment to a cause
from online public messaging. In 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW), 1050–
1057. IEEE.
Waters, C. 2022. To V or Not to V: Contingencies of Going
Vegan. Humanity & Society, 46(2): 151–169.
Willer, R. 2009.
Groups reward individual sacrifice: The
status solution to the collective action problem. American
Sociological Review, 74(1): 23–43.
Yasseri, T.; Margetts, H.; John, P.; and Hale, S. 2016. Polit-
ical turbulence: How social media shape collective action.
Princeton University Press.
Zhang, H.; and Pan, J. 2019. Casm: A deep-learning ap-
proach for identifying collective action events with text and
image data from social media. Sociological Methodology,
49(1): 1–57.
Ziems, C.; Shaikh, O.; Zhang, Z.; Held, W.; Chen, J.; and
Yang, D. 2023. Can large language models transform com-
putational social science? Computational Linguistics, 1–53.
1231


Paper Checklist
1. For most authors...
(a) Would answering this research question advance sci-
ence without violating social contracts, such as violat-
ing privacy norms, perpetuating unfair profiling, exac-
erbating the socio-economic divide, or implying disre-
spect to societies or cultures? Yes.
(b) Do your main claims in the abstract and introduction
accurately reflect the paper’s contributions and scope?
Yes.
(c) Do you clarify how the proposed methodological ap-
proach is appropriate for the claims made? Yes, in the
“Methodological framework” section.
(d) Do you clarify what are possible artifacts in the data
used, given population-specific distributions? Yes, we
discuss potential biases of our data in the “Discussion
and conclusion” section.
(e) Did you describe the limitations of your work? Yes,
limitations are presented and discussed in the “Discus-
sion and conclusion” section.
(f) Did you discuss any potential negative societal im-
pacts of your work? Yes, we address negative societal
impact in the “Ethical considerations” section.
(g) Did you discuss any potential misuse of your work?
Yes, we discuss potential misuse in the “‘Ethical con-
siderations” section.
(h) Did you describe steps taken to prevent or mitigate po-
tential negative outcomes of the research, such as data
and model documentation, data anonymization, re-
sponsible release, access control, and the reproducibil-
ity of findings? Yes, we share our framework in the
“Methodological framework” section, and full experi-
mental details (code) are provided in the Supplemen-
tary Material. Moreover, data does not contain user-
specific information, only aggregated or anonymized
measures (see DataSheet).
(i) Have you read the ethics review guidelines and en-
sured that your paper conforms to them? Yes.
2. Additionally, if your study involves hypotheses testing...
(a) Did you clearly state the assumptions underlying all
theoretical results? Yes, we frame our experiments
within the scope of previous research in the “Method-
ological framework” section.
(b) Have you provided justifications for all theoretical re-
sults? Yes, justifications are provided in the “Results”
and “Discussion and conclusion” sections.
(c) Did you discuss competing hypotheses or theories that
might challenge or complement your theoretical re-
sults? Yes, other approaches in terms of theoretical
frameworks and the motivation behind our choice are
described in the “Methodological framework” and the
“Related works” sections.
(d) Have you considered alternative mechanisms or expla-
nations that might account for the same outcomes ob-
served in your study? Yes, in the “Results” and “Dis-
cussion and conclusion” sections we explore potential
confounders of our results and highlight limitations of
our work.
(e) Did you address potential biases or limitations in your
theoretical framework? Yes, these are addressed in the
“Discussion and conclusion” section.
(f) Have you related your theoretical results to the exist-
ing literature in social science? Yes, we directly relate
our work to previous work in Computational Social
Science and Social Psychology theories, as detailed
in “Introduction”, “Theoretical framework”, “Method-
ological framework” and “Related works”.
(g) Did you discuss the implications of your theoretical
results for policy, practice, or further research in the
social science domain? Yes, these are discussed in the
“Discussion and conclusion” section.
3. Additionally, if you are including theoretical proofs...
(a) Did you state the full set of assumptions of all theoret-
ical results? NA.
(b) Did you include complete proofs of all theoretical re-
sults? NA.
4. Additionally, if you ran machine learning experiments...
(a) Did you include the code, data, and instructions
needed to reproduce the main experimental results (ei-
ther in the supplemental material or as a URL)? Yes.
Included link to GitHub repository.
(b) Did you specify all the training details (e.g., data splits,
hyperparameters, how they were chosen)? Yes, when-
ever necessary (e.g. HDBSCAN clustering in the nar-
ratives mapping and OLS regression predictors). De-
scribed in “Methodological framework” and in “Re-
sults”, details are given in the code provided in the
GitHub repository. In all other cases, we do not train
any model(s) but use existing ones.
(c) Did you report error bars (e.g., with respect to the ran-
dom seed after running experiments multiple times)?
Yes, we report error bars in all relevant Figures (3, 4
and 5).
(d) Did you include the total amount of compute and the
type of resources used (e.g., type of GPUs, internal
cluster, or cloud provider)? Yes, see Appendix D.
(e) Do you justify how the proposed evaluation is suffi-
cient and appropriate to the claims made? Yes, speci-
fied in the “Methodological framework” section.
(f) Do you discuss what is “the cost“ of misclassification
and fault (in)tolerance? NA.
5. Additionally, if you are using existing assets (e.g., code,
data, models) or curating/releasing new assets, without
compromising anonymity...
(a) If your work uses existing assets, did you cite the
creators? Yes, creators of models used are cited in
the “Theoretical framework”, “Methodological frame-
work” and “Results” sections.
(b) Did you mention the license of the assets? Yes, see
Appendix D.
1232


(c) Did you include any new assets in the supplemental
material or as a URL? Yes, generated data is included
in the GitHub repository.
(d) Did you discuss whether and how consent was ob-
tained from people whose data you’re using/curating?
NA.
(e) Did you discuss whether the data you are using/cu-
rating contains personally identifiable information or
offensive content? Yes. Our data does not include PII
(except for identifiable YouTube channels). We discuss
misinformation and offensive content in the “Ethical
considerations” section.
(f) If you are curating or releasing new datasets, did you
discuss how you intend to make your datasets FAIR
(see FORCE11 (2020))? Yes, see ‘Ethical considera-
tions” section and DataSheet on the GitHub repository.
(g) If you are curating or releasing new datasets, did you
create a Datasheet for the Dataset (see Gebru et al.
(2021))? Yes, see the GitHub repository.
6. Additionally, if you used crowdsourcing or conducted
research with human subjects, without compromising
anonymity...
(a) Did you include the full text of instructions given to
participants and screenshots? NA.
(b) Did you describe any potential participant risks, with
mentions of Institutional Review Board (IRB) ap-
provals? NA.
(c) Did you include the estimated hourly wage paid to
participants and the total amount spent on participant
compensation? NA.
(d) Did you discuss how data is stored, shared, and dei-
dentified? NA.
1233


Appendix A
Table 6 summarizes the volume of collected data in terms
of the number of videos and comments per year, for each of
the analyzed plant-based challenges. Note that such a vol-
ume refers to the originally collected data, i.e. no filtering or
cleaning is performed in this phase.
Year
n. videos
n. comments
2014
v: 300
m: 64
n: 314
v: 27113
m: 281
n: 22380
2015
v: 431
m: 91
n: 423
v: 61047
m: 2379
n: 143316
2016
v: 445
m: 152
n: 457
v: 74136
m: 2715
n: 303835
2017
v: 527
m: 175
n: 438
v: 202943
m: 3688
n: 166767
2018
v: 678
m: 207
n: 331
v: 144711
m: 16217
n: 440456
2019
v: 728
m: 240
n: 437
v: 146233
m: 11587
n: 424704
2020
v: 820
m: 336
n: 442
v: 241289
m: 128576
n: 342716
2021
v: 786
m: 392
n: 441
v: 418376
m: 18375
n: 398727
2022
v: 787
m: 380
n: 305
v: 151607
m: 12584
n: 176818
2023
v: 724
m: 385
n: 517
v: 460404
m: 37384
n: 484054
Table 6: Volume of originally retrieved videos and com-
ments by movement and year: Veganuary (v), Meatless
March (m), No Meat May (n).
Table 7 compares the volume of the cleaned and filtered
collected target data with the volume of baseline videos of
reference, for each of the analyzed plant-based challenges.
Figure 7 outlines the distribution of videos by mapped
narrative type.
Year
n. videos target
n. videos baseline
2014
v: 78
m: 24
n: 81
v: 76
m: 24
n: 76
2015
v: 133
m: 34
n: 136
v: 129
m: 34
n: 136
2016
v: 160
m: 39
n: 145
v: 141
m: 39
n: 143
2017
v: 182
m: 43
n: 106
v: 173
m: 42
n: 103
2018
v: 237
m: 46
n: 78
v: 220
m: 45
n: 77
2019
v: 291
m: 82
n: 132
v: 233
m: 76
n: 129
2020
v: 290
m: 69
n: 77
v: 246
m: 69
n: 77
2021
v: 232
m: 71
n: 100
v: 219
m: 66
n: 96
2022
v: 166
m: 63
n: 76
v: 151
m: 61
n: 75
2023
v: 173
m: 56
n: 147
v: 125
m: 49
n: 88
Table 7: Volume of cleaned videos by movement and year,
comparing target and baseline sets: Veganuary (v), Meatless
March (m), No Meat May (n).
Figure 7: Number of videos by narrative type, according to
the reference moral vegan ideology framework.
Appendix B
We prompted Llama 2 70B Chat by providing the model
with a system prompt to contextualize the task and a hu-
1234


man message to precisely define the task. For each of
the narrative identity groups (i.e. communal-oriented and
agency-oriented), we included definitions of narratives in the
prompts as follows:
• Duty to care: Moral duty to protect all living creatures,
fostering compassion and connection with all beings.
• Duty to fight: Moral duty to dispel ignorance, overcome
misinformation, and inspire others about the benefits of a
vegan lifestyle.
• Duty to educate: Moral duty to actively engage in rights
activism, driven by a sense of injustice.
• Right to good health: Moral right to prioritize personal
well-being through a plant-based diet, emphasizing phys-
ical and mental benefits.
• Right to inner peace: Moral right to align actions with
values, fostering a life of peace and self-acceptance.
• Right to choose: Moral right to make personal choices,
accepting others’ opinion and not imposing own choices.
Narratives - communal-oriented
1
System prompt: You are tasked with
identifying the predominant moral
narrative expressed by a text.
2
3
Prompt: Identify the predominant
narrative expressed by the text,
choosing between ’duty_to_care’
({dutycare}), ’duty_to_fight’ ({
dutyfight}), ’duty_to_educate’ ({
dutyeducate}), or ’other’ if you
cannot find an answer. DO NOT
reply using a complete sentence,
and ONLY give the answer in the
following format: LABEL.
4
5
Text: {text}
6
7
Answer:
Narratives - agency-oriented
1
System prompt: You are tasked with
identifying the predominant moral
narrative expressed by a text.
2
3
Prompt: Identify the predominant
narrative expressed by the text,
choosing between ’
right_to_good_health’ ({
rightogoodhealth}), ’
right_to_inner_peace’ ({
rightoinnerpeace}), ’
right_to_choose’ ({rightochoose})
, or ’other’ if cannot find an
answer. DO NOT reply using a
complete sentence, and ONLY give
the answer in the following
format: LABEL.
4
5
Text: {text}
6
7
Answer:
Appendix C
The following list contains selected examples within the top-
50 comments with the highest relative frequency of collec-
tive action markers overall:
• “Vegan don’t fight, vegans unite.”
• “Do you support factory farming?”
• “Do you even fight bro.”
• “Don’t do over action ok?”
• “So what do we do?”
• “Okay, what do I do?”
• “I support this calm protests.”
• “Facebook: you’re supporting actual genocide by sup-
porting facebook.”
• “Actually we do this everyday here.”
• “What do I do about that?”
• “How do you join random meetings?”
• “So, if this guy decides to actively join the cause and
become vegan, will you actively join and support his
cause?”
• “Join us eaters.”
• “How can I do what you do?”
Appendix D
In this section, we will detail existing assets used in terms
of their licenses and the computational resources needed for
the analysis.
Licenses
Code snippets provided by Google Developers for the
use of YouTube API are licensed under the Apache
2.0 License. Python packages used to process YouTube
data, namely Youtube Transcript, langdetect
1235


and Whisper are licensed under an MIT license, while
Llama-2-70B-chat model employed in the mapping
validation is an open-source LLM released under a commer-
cial use license2. Mformer models used in the extraction of
moral scores are shared on HuggingFace and licensed under
an MIT License, while S-BERT model for the extraction of
sentence embeddings is licensed under the Apache License
2.0. The collective action dictionary by Smith, McGarty, and
Thomas (2018) is publicly available.
Resources
We utilized a V100 30GB GPU for both extracting moral
foundations scores through Mformer and generating sen-
tence embeddings via S-BERT. All other resources were
deployed locally on an Apple M1 Pro machine with 8 cores
and 16GB of RAM.
2https://ai.meta.com/llama/license/
1236
