Twitter’s Fake News Discourses
Around Climate Change and Global
Warming
Ahmed Al-Rawi 1*†, Derrick OʼKeefe 1, Oumar Kane 2† and Aimé-Jules Bizimana 3
1School of Communication, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada, 2Département de Communication Sociale et
Publique, Faculté de Communication, Université du Québec à Montréal (UQÀM), Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Department of Social
Sciences at the Université de Québec en Outaouais (UQO), Gatineau, QC, Canada
In this empirical study, we collected about 6.8 million tweets that mentioned “fake news”,
and we extracted references to climate change and/or global warming to understand the
public discourses around these two issues. Using a mixed method, the study’s ﬁndings
show that there is a clear politically polarized discussion on climate change. We found that
the majority of tweets focus on the United States context though references to other
Western coutnries are often made. The anti-Liberal or anti-Democratic online community
was more active on Twitter than the anti-conservative or anti-Republican community. Also,
more than half the examined most retweeted posts contained claims about climate change
being a natural cycle or even denying it exists, while about a third of these tweets stated
that climate change was anthropogenic. The implications of the study are discussed, we
argue that fake news as a term has a hollow meaning as it is used as a buzzword to
discredit opponents and further the political agenda of different parties not only in the
United States but also in other Western countries like Australia.
Keywords: climate cahnge, fake news, global wanning, political polarization, social media
INTRODUCTION
Climate change is one important news topic where the issue of “fake news” and related phenomena
plays a central role in media coverage, political debate, and the broader public discussion. As author
Mark Miller notes, the scale and gravity of the climate issue provides psychological reasons for people
to be open to believing news that distorts or denies reality:
Numerous scientiﬁc studies have proven that climate change is scientiﬁc fact. It is not fake news.
But it is bad news. And many people don’t want to face it.It’s easier, for some, to believe that climate
scientists are falsifying their studies so they can make money promoting the “climate change
industry.” For some, the fake news stories are easier to accept than the real story (Miller, 2019).
Today, various fringe groups like QAnon often regard climate change as a hoax. The latter group
now boasts thousands of followers of their anonymous Internet posts that blend “hard to decipher
prophecies,” anti-establishment rhetoric, and frequent denunciations of mainstream news sources as
fake (LaFrance, 2020) QAnon’s rapid growth of inﬂuence is just one sign of the dynamic and ever-
changing communications and media landscape in which the notion of “fake news” is being
contested and weaponized by various ideologically-motivated actors. The current global pandemic
has highlighted the pivotal role that “fake news” plays in media discourse on public health and
epidemiology. In the case of COVID-19 the accusations of fake news were deployed nearly every day
against various media outlets by the former United States president on the defensive, demonstrating
Edited by:
R. Lyle Skains,
Bournemouth University,
United Kingdom
Reviewed by:
Voltaire Alvarado Peterson,
University of Concepcion, Chile
Md. Sayeed Al-Zaman,
Jahangirnagar University, Bangladesh
*Correspondence:
Ahmed Al-Rawi
aalrawi@sfu.ca
†ORCID:
Ahmed Al-Rawi
orcid.org/0000-0002-1825-0097
Oumar Kane
orcid.org/0000-0002-6843-5380
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Science and Environmental
Communication,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Communication
Received: 23 June 2021
Accepted: 13 September 2021
Published: 22 November 2021
Citation:
Al-Rawi A, OʼKeefe D, Kane O and
Bizimana Aé-J (2021) Twitter’s Fake
News Discourses Around Climate
Change and Global Warming.
Front. Commun. 6:729818.
doi: 10.3389/fcomm.2021.729818
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
November 2021 | Volume 6 | Article 729818
1
BRIEF RESEARCH REPORT
published: 22 November 2021
doi: 10.3389/fcomm.2021.729818


and accentuating the populist right’s weaponization of the term to
discredit
mainstream
journalism
critical
of
the
Trump
administration. The term fake news has been harnessed as a
form of networked political spamming by those aiming to attack
and discredit the scientiﬁc consensus on anthropogenic climate
change (Al-Rawi, 2020). Indeed, the concept of “fake news” has
become today a ﬂoating signiﬁer, a contested discursive tool, and
a hollow buzzword with varied and dynamic meanings—largely
due to the fact that it’s a favourite expression of Donald Trump
and some of his followers, who used Twitter and other social
media to amplify their messages.
Especially given the powerful multiplier effect of some digital
pulpits, this paper’s argument is that, when it comes to media
discussions of climate change, the term fake news is primarily
associated with the idea that the scientiﬁc consensus, as reﬂected
in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s (IPCC)
annual reports, is a “hoax.” Indeed, the intellectual and discursive
tug-of-war over fake news is part of the evolution of concepts of
misinformation and disinformation. The issue is extremely
relevant in our ongoing time of climate change, given that
allegations and counter-allegations of false information and
propaganda campaigns have been central to the discursive
struggle over global warming for decades. According to a
recent study conducted by Brandwatch, “the climate change
content that got the most engagements in the last year is from
a known conspiracy site called Natural News” (Reid, 2020).
The phenomena of misinformation and disinformation with
respect to climate science dates back many decades, and its role
and inﬂuence on policy has been researched extensively.
ExxonMobil and other major oil and gas companies, for
example, have been singled out for their role in funding think
tanks that specialized in casting doubt on climate science. In this
way many of the companies contributing signiﬁcantly to the
emissions causing global warming have also “funded, shaped, and
advanced climate denial” (Grasso, 2019), and this behaviour has
allegedly “substantially contributed to paralysing global climate
policy for decades” (Ibid.). The purpose of this web of denial has
been to confuse the public and decision-makers in order to delay
climate action and thereby protect fossil fuel business interests
and defend libertarian, free-market conservative ideologies.
(Cook et al., 2019).
This paper’s argument is that, when it comes to media
discussions of climate change, the term fake news is merely a
tool to attack opponents. Whereas in the past the denial
movement
was
characterized
by
high
proﬁle
“experts”
asserting their views through the lens of scientiﬁc skepticism
(Jacques, 2012), the contemporary online discourse features
signiﬁers like “fake news” far more frequently in debates about
climate science.
Whether during an election campaign or not, there is now
grave concern about politically-motivated groups or individuals
spreading false information in order to inﬂuence or change public
opinion—as well as growing concern over ﬁnanicially-motivated
schemes to produce fake news articles to attract clicks (Farka and
Schou, 2018: 298). Turning to the speciﬁcs of the current political
debates and researches focused on “fake news,” one of the
hegemonic political projects, while admittedly amorphous, is
the efforts of far-right political forces to promote nationalist
and xenophobic political narratives, leaders, and policies. Our
research into fake news and climate change is unavoidably
touched by the larger global trends of the new right-wing
authoritarian personiﬁed by Trump and other ﬁgures such as
India’s Narendra Modi and Brazil’s Jair Bolsonaro. Critics of
these ﬁgures argue they pose a serious threat in large part due to
their aim to contribute to the “undermining of the institutions of
liberal democracy” (Gandesha, 2020: 9).
Literature Review
The notion of a climate denial movement has been theorized and
debated widely. Peter J. Jacques, without drawing any moral or
political equivalencies, compares the phenomenon to Holocaust
denial, in the sense that both represent reactionary efforts that
camouﬂage their true intentions, sow confusion and demand
“space for two competing and supposedly equally valid sides in a
public debate that adherents say deserves equal treatment”
(Jacques, 2012: 10). Jacques’ description of the means by
which climate denial is disseminated is worth considering:
“. . .well-credentialed contrarians serve as spokesmen
(mostly men) to media forums outside peer-reviewed
journals. Thus, it appears to policy elites, journalists,
and of course the general public that there are two
equally legitimate “sides” and that each should receive
equal attention. Climate denial advocates sow confusion
in a public that is often unaware that core elements of
climate science have far more vetting, good-faith
witnesses, corroboration, and merit (Ibid.).
It has often proven difﬁcult for researchers to identify all the
funding sources of the climate denial industry, since “many of the
think tanks that continue to question established climate science
are nonproﬁt groups that aren’t required to disclose their donors”
(Friedman and Tabuchi, 2019). In addition to those directly
associated
with
fossil
fuel
interests,
key
funding
and
dissemination of climate denial has often been part of a
broader
constellation
promoting
rollbacks
of
government
regulation in general. In this category, the brothers David and
Charles Koch have played a key role. A recent book-length study
describes Charles Koch as having created “a political inﬂuence
network that is arguably the most powerful and far-reaching
operation ever run out of an American CEO’s ofﬁce” (Leonard,
2019: 5). To give just one example, former President Barack
Obama’s effort to introduce climate change legislation took a
circuitous route reportedly in large due to the inﬂuence of the
Koch network:
Fossil fuel magnates Charles and David Koch have, through
Americans for Prosperity, a conservative group they back,
succeeded in persuading many members of Congress to sign a
little-known pledge in which they have promised to vote against
legislation relating to climate change unless it is accompanied by
an equivalent amount of tax cuts. Since most solutions to the
problem of greenhouse-gas emissions require costs to the
polluters and the public, the pledge essentially commits those
who sign to it to vote against nearly any meaningful bill regarding
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
November 2021 | Volume 6 | Article 729818
2
Al-Rawi et al.
Twitter’s Fake News Discourses


global warming, and acts as yet another roadblock to action.
(Mayer, 2013).
In recent years, the scientiﬁc consensus around climate change
has become more robust and the alarming effects of global
warming more visible around the planet, the modalities of
climate denial are changing and taking new shapes. As
mentioned above, the concept of “fake news” is a ﬂoating
signiﬁer,
and
Donald
Trump
dismissed
climate
science
outright
on
a
number
of
occasions,
including
famously
tweeting that global warming was a “hoax” perpetrated by
China to advance its geopolitical interests (Worland, 2019).
This issue also expalins why our study found that the majority
of discourses on climate change and fake news focused on the
United States context.
Prior to the explosion in the use and discussion of the phrase
“fake news” in the past few years, these issues were largely
discussed
using
the
vocabulary
of
misinformation,
disinformation, spin and propaganda. In its simplest and
narrowest
sense,
misinformation
has
been
deﬁned
as
encompassing
only
unintentionally
misleading
content
or
unintentionally spread false information. Disinformation, in
contrast, tends to refer to the purposeful creation of false news
stories and the intentional spreading of false information
(Kavanagh and Rich, 2018: 122).
Following these traditional deﬁnitions, disinformation shared
unknowingly by a social media user would be a case of spreading
misinformation (Farka and Schou, 2018: 298). The very
architecture of social media networks, however, makes possible
vast disinformation campaigns by state or non-state actors in
which thousands or even millions of individual users become
unwitting disseminators of misinformation. It has been argued,
furthermore, that in our social media age the traditional
deﬁnitions
have
been
rendered
insufﬁcient
because
they
neglect
the
increasingly-common
phenomenon
of
users
deliberately
sharing
information
without
knowing
with
anything close to certainty whether the information is truthful
(Ross and Rivers, 2018).
Given the emergence of what author Nick Srnicek has dubbed
“Platform Capitalism,” in which “the digital economy is an
increasingly pervasive infrastructure for the contemporary
economy,” the danger of large-scale disinformation campaigns
is now widely discussed both by national security apparatuses and
the general public (Srnicek, 2017: 5). The alleged foreign
interference in the 2016 United States presidential election is
only the highest proﬁle of a number of such cases.
The concern about the spreading of misinformation is not
limited to the mass proliferation of disinformation by ill-
informed or gullible social media users. Given the rapid
growth of machine learning (artiﬁcial intelligence, or AI) and
automation, it is important to look deeper than bad intentions
and hoaxes to examine the threat posed by programmed,
autonomous
social
media
accounts
known
as
“bots.”
“According to Woolley and Guilbeault, the political bots used
in the 2016 United States elections were primarily used to create
manufactured consensus” (quoted in Burkhardt, 2017: 18). The
notion of “Manufacturing Consent” used to be synonymous with
the media theory advanced by Noam Chomsky and colleagues
that focused on the “ﬁlters” and biases of mainstream, corporate-
owned media outlets (Chomsky and Herman, 1998). The media
landscape is now much more complicated and arguably much
more prone to the spread of disinformation.
Whether during an election campaign or not, there is now
grave concern about politically-motivated groups or individuals
spreading false information in order to inﬂuence or change public
opinion—as well as growing concern over ﬁnanicially-motivated
schemes to produce fake news articles to attract clicks (Farka and
Schou, 2018: 298). Researchers have also carried out narrower
empirical studies focusing on topics such as misleading health
information; while debates rage about how much people actually
rely on Internet searches to self-diagnose on medical issues, the
potential for physical and mental harm caused by people applying
dubious, low-quality, or untrustworthy information illustrates the
importance of considering the credibility of online health
information in particular. (Eysenbach, 2017, p.124). Farkas
and Schou also note that studies have been carried out on
government-organized
propaganda,
hoaxes
involving
Wikipedia, and racist propaganda (Farka and Schou, 2018,
p. 298).
Theoretical Framework
Turning to the speciﬁcs of the current political debates and
researches focused on “fake news,” one of the hegemonic
political projects, while admittedly amorphous, is the efforts of
right-wing and far-right political forces to promote nationalist
and xenophobic political narratives, leaders, and policies. Among
the key institutions these ﬁgures and the movements supporting
them allegedly seek to undermine are media outlets that remain
independent of government inﬂuence or direction, a key pillar of
democratic political systems. A recent study found that Facebook
was the most susceptible of the Silicon Valley digital giants to the
spreading of false information (Hopp, Ferrucci, and Vargo, 2020).
Of interest, researchers found that “sharing countermedia
content on Facebook is positively associated with ideological
extremity
and
negatively
associated
with
trust
in
the
mainstream news media” (Ibid.) Despite these and other
ﬁndings, Facebook has faced criticism for its handling of the
threat posed by disinformation. In July 2020, for instance, a
number of United States Senators including Elizabeth Warren
wrote to the company’s executives, speciﬁcally criticizing their
mechanism for fact-checking as it related to climate issues: “If
Facebook is truly “committed to ﬁghting the spread of false news
on Facebook and Instagram,” the company must immediately
acknowledge in its fact-checking process that the climate crisis is
not a matter of opinion and act to close loopholes that allow
climate disinformation to spread on its platform” (Vox, 2020).
Facebook has recently begun to take greater action against fake
accounts
accused
of
spreading
disinformation,
including
disabling a number of accounts allegedly linked to employees
of Bolsonaro’s family members in Brazil (CNN, 2020).
Accelerating and in some ways transforming these long-
standing and well-organized disinformation campaigns around
climate change, the so-called “alt-right” and other powerful
Internet subcultures have emerged to “take advantage of the
current media ecosystem to manipulate news frames, set agendas,
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
November 2021 | Volume 6 | Article 729818
3
Al-Rawi et al.
Twitter’s Fake News Discourses


and propagate ideas” (Marwick and Lewis, 2017). Especially when
analyzing a medium like Twitter, the notion of “attention
hacking” is useful for understanding how far-right group have
been able to “increase the visibility of their ideas through the
strategic use of social media, memes, and bots—as well as by
targeting journalists, bloggers, and inﬂuencers to help spread
content.” (Ibid.). In this contest for hegemony, Farkas and Schou
identify three main uses of the concept of fake news: 1) critiques
of digital capitalism, 2) critique of right-wing politics, and 3)
critiques of liberal and mainstream journalism (2018).
To grasp the complexity of the signiﬁer of Fake News and, in
particular, how it is currently being shaped and reshaped by
Trump, his administration, and by a diverse ﬁeld of media and
social media actors ranging from anonymous movements like
QAnon
to
more
traditional
media
commentators,
or
“inﬂuencers” in the parlance of YouTube and other social
media
platforms
emerging
to
rival
mainstream
network
broadcasters, we must also mention the proliferation of others
terms such as “Bull Shitting” or BS. Sometimes only subtly
different in form and content from conventional political spin
or lies, BS is deﬁned as being produced without any concern for
the truth; it is simply made up, phony, and bogus. For this reason,
BS can be considered potentially far more insidious, since it
wanders so far aﬁeld of reality that it circumvents all but the most
rigorous fact-checking (Berghel, 2017: 111). Other terms used to
describe this and related phenomena associated in particular with
the Trump administration include: “post-truth,” a situation in
which “objective facts are less inﬂuential in shaping public
opinion than appeals to emotion” (Ross and Rivers, 2018: 11);
and
“alternative
facts,”
a
phrase
from
Trump’s
former
spokesperson Kellyanne Conway in defence of comments by
then White House press secretary which had come under ﬁre
for lack of veracity (Ibid.)
These are the constellation of discursive trends being brought
to bear on the debate over climate change. As average global
temperatures have risen consistently in recent years, so too have
poll results showing people in the United States concerned about
the threat posed by climate change. Despite the accumulation of
scientiﬁc evidence and of public concern, there remains a
signiﬁcant portion of the population who have proven difﬁcult
or impossible to move from entrenched positions on this issue.
Perhaps the most famous studies on public attitudes towards
the climate crisis are the annual surveys conducted by the Yale
Program on Climate Change Communication. The most recent
survey results, released at the beginning of 2020, found “(n)early
six in ten (58%) Americans are now either “Alarmed” or
“Concerned” about global warming. From 2014 to 2019, the
proportion of “Alarmed” nearly tripled” (Leiserowitz, Maibach,
Roser-Renouf, and Smith). Notably, this was the ﬁrst time in the
history of the study that those who were “Alarmed” made up the
largest cohort at 31%. The other ﬁve categories included:
concerned (26%), cautious (16%), disengaged (7%), doubtful
(10%), and dismissive (10%). (Ibid.)
These results may seem promising for those interested in
seeing policies aimed at mitigating climate change implemented,
but there remains a gap between the public’s feelings or fears
about climate change and institutional and even personal change.
Past studies, in fact, have found that better results could be
achieved by appealing to other values rather than directly
focusing on the scientiﬁc evidence and threats related to
climate change.
In a 2012 paper arguing against the commonly-held notion
“that convincing deniers that climate change is real is necessary
for them to act pro-environmentally,” researchers make the case
that their results show that those aiming for climate mitigation
policy action can potentially achieve better results by appealing to
shared values that make no mention of climate science (Bain,
Hornsey, Bongiorno and Jeffries, 2012). In effect they argue you
can catch more ﬂies with honey than with vinegar, as the
expression
goes.
“Deniers
are
united
in
disbelieving
in
anthropogenic climate change, but many already believe that
mitigation efforts can have positive effects on society” (Ibid.). In
essence, they make the case for a reframing of the climate debate
towards the positive societal beneﬁts that would accrue along with
mitigation efforts: “framing climate change action in terms of
producing greater interpersonal warmth or societal development
was more effective in promoting environmental citizenship than a
frame focusing on the reality and risks of climate change, and this
was particularly the case for deniers” (Ibid.). To take a simple
example of a practical application, one can imagine urban
planners stressing the community and neighborly beneﬁts of
city streets ﬁlled with pedestrians rather than stressing the
negative consequences of car emissions for the climate.
Years before Trump and the current particular debate around
social media and Fake News, Bain et al. were pointing to the way
in which climate was but one part of a constellation of signiﬁers in
a
discursive
and
media
battle:
“Disturbingly
for
environmentalists,
attitudes
towards
climate
change
and
climate science seem to have become part of a constellation of
attitudes deﬁned by the “culture wars”: one may have little more
luck of convincing a denier that climate change is real as of
convincing a conservative Christian to support abortion, or a
committed liberal to oppose it” (Ibid.). We decided to conduct
this study to ﬁll a gap in literature on the discourses surrounding
fake news and climate change and answer the following research
questions: (RQ1) What are the main categories and political tone
in the most retweeted posts referencing fake news? (RQ2) What
does this suggest about the mobilization of “fake news” as a
signiﬁer in the ongoing discurive and political struggles over
climate change in the United States and beyond?
METHODS
Today, culture wars and all political struggles play out in large
part in cyberspace. Digital media platforms have become ﬁercely
contested
spaces,
and
communication
research
aimed
in
particular at the largest platforms has followed these trends.
For our purposes, we used a mixed method involving different
approaches. First, we used manual content analysis that includes
both quantitative and qualitative measures. This is a traditional
research method, and then we combined it with a digital analysis
of the tweets by examining the most frequent hashtags, words,
and phrases with the help of Python scripts as will be illustrated
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
November 2021 | Volume 6 | Article 729818
4
Al-Rawi et al.
Twitter’s Fake News Discourses


below. We followed two approaches because they complement
each other and provide richer insight into the Twitter data that we
examined. “Mixed method research employs both (quantitative
and qualitative) approaches iteratively or simultaneously to create
a research outcome stronger than either method individually”
(Malina et al., 2011, p. 5).
We retrieved a recent large dataset consisting of over 6.8
million posts referencing “fake news” and/or “fakenews” pulled
from Twitter using TCAT. These tweets were collected between
November 27, 2019 and February 14, 2020 (See Figure 1). We
started the data collection in Novemebr 2019 because it is the
month Oxford Dictionaries chose the term “climate emergency”
as the word of the year, and we stopped the data collection in
February because of the large dataset that was collected. From this
dataset, we ﬁltered tweets that referenced “climate change” and/or
“global warming”, and the outcome consists of 12,055 tweets
posted by 10,542 unique Twitter users. To examine our initial
research question, we pulled the top 500 most retweeted posts
from the ﬁltered dataset. We found that the highest number of
tweets occurred on January 13, 2020 (n  1,502) mostly due to
circulating a retweet that attacked CNN and defended the former
President, Donald Trump, stating: “RT @adriandt31: Fake News
CNN is currently doing a hit piece on @realDonaldTrump Called
The Presidents Lies @CNN you are truly INSANE! All 5 of your
watchers are insane as well. You stated that Climate Change
helped ISIS...REALLY? REALLY? OMG your channel is TRASH!
#FakeNewsCNN”. In fact, this message was retweeted 1,458
times. Following previous research (Al-Rawi, 2020; Zhou,
et al., 2019), we analyzed the most retweeted posts because
there is so much social media noise, and it is necessary to
focus on what audiences mostly engage with which can be
evident from these most retweeted posts. Two of the top ﬁve
tweets, for example, simply repeat the ﬁrst line of a December
2019 column published in the United Kingdom Telegraph,
“Theclimate change ‘emergency’ is fake news.” The form and
content of this short, declarative sentence suggests the discursive
power of the current United States president, who routinely
responds to critical questions at White House brieﬁngs in
similar terms, casting aside the substance of the issue by
denouncing the reporter and dismissing their media outlet
tout court.
This study was conducted in two stages. In the ﬁrst stage, we
manually coded the top 500 most retweeted posts from the
dataset to look into the discursive strategies behind the Tweets
aiming to support or dismiss or critique journalism reporting on
the scientiﬁc consensus that climate change is caused by human
activity and represents a clear and present danger and requires
sustained action in response. In this regard, Badaway et al. use the
methodology of text analysis on a Twitter dataset from 2016 to
demonstrate the role that trolls and other partisan users based in
or aligned with Russia promoted primarily conservative causes
and, speciﬁcally, pro-Trump material in the run up to the
United States presidential election (Badawy et al., 2018). In
collecting their data, the authors relied on a massive dataset of
over 43 million election-related posts, including accounts
identiﬁed associated with Russian trolls. In the second stage of
their research, they used label propagation to infer the ideology of
all users based on the news sources they shared; this method
enabled them to classify a large number of users as either “liberal“
or “conservative” with a precision and recall rate of over 90%
(Ibid.). We partly borrowed our content analysis method from
this study and a previous one written by the authors (Al-Rawi
et al., 2021) when we designed our two codebooks. In other
words, we used a deductive approach in coding our dataset using
FIGURE 1 | Frequency of tweets referencing climate change and/or global warming in the dataset.
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
November 2021 | Volume 6 | Article 729818
5
Al-Rawi et al.
Twitter’s Fake News Discourses


Microsoft Excel. The unit of analysis is the textual content of the
tweet in English language. The ﬁrst codebook categorizes tweets
into three types of belief with respect to climate change: 1)
Anthropogenic or human-made, 2) natural cycle or not
occurring,
3)
unclear
or
vague.
The
second
codebook,
however, deals with the political tone associated with climate
change
discussions:
1)
anti-liberal/Democratic,
2)
anti-
conservative/Republican, and 3) political but target unclear, or
not political. Two coders independently examined a sample of 50
tweets to test these two codebooks, and inter-coder reliability was
satisfactory (α ≥0.750 for categories and α ≥0.810 for political
tone) using Krippendorff Alpha (Krippendorff, 2011).
In making additional conclusions from the data, we used a
digital method in the second stage of the research to identify the
most mentioned users, top hashtags, and most used words and
phrases. To achieve our goal, we used Python scripts to shed
further light into the nature of climate change and fake news issues.
We believe this mixed method approach, combining qualitatively
analysis with quantitative digital analysis, provides important
insight for both researchers and others working on the uniquely
important and challenging collective action problem that is
anthropogenic climate change. Especially given the medium’s
disproportionate number of journalist-users, understanding how
the debate around fake news and climate change plays out on
Twitter is key for anyone interested in media coverage of climate
issues. Knowing the mechanism by which even the best journalistic
efforts can be drowned in a sea of social media disinformation can
help us all stay above water in the 21st Century.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
To answer the study’s ﬁrst research question, we found that the
majority (55.8%) of the top 500 most retweeted posts were
categorized as representative of the belief that climate change
either isn’t happening or that its causation is unrelated to human
activities. The ﬁnding that varying expressions of climate change
denial dominated the top tweets including the term “fake news”
and climate suggests the importance of this signiﬁer in the current
political
climate.
Tweets
that
reﬂected
behind
belief
in
anthropogenic-caused climate change lagged far behind at
31.4% of the top 500, while 12.8% of the tweets were
ambiguous or unclear (Table 1).
Before discussing the results, it is imperative to indicate the
challenges of studying social media posts around the issue of fake
news and climate change due to the recurrent use of irony and the
ambiguity that deﬁnes many posts. There are also challenges in
interpreting social media posts, especially brief messages on a
medium such as Twitter, and the understanding of which requires
knowledge of local political actors and context, as well as a keen
eye for irony or satire. In the following tweet, for example, one
user clearly parodies those who cry “fake news” to dismiss the
threat of climate change: “Climate change is a myth! #FakeNews.
The thermometers are rigged! I want a recount! Tell the penguins
it’s their responsibility to affect their own continent not the rest of
the world!” Not all uses of irony or satire were this unsubtle,
however, and this contributed to a relatively high percentage of
tweets among the top 500 that the researchers had to categorize as
unclear or ambiguous.
Further, a large proportion of the top tweets do not have an
explicit political target, although they can be seen as part of a
discursive struggle linked to political actors. The phrase and its
primary usage as a term to dismiss countervailing evidence or
reports one does not agree with coming from mainstream news
sources, lends itself to short pithy phrases. One tweet, for
instance, is characteristic of the many posts that dismiss
climate science without a clear political actor being targeted:
“Because it makes better headlines to blame it on climate change.
#FakeNews.” The use of the hashtag in this example, parallels the
term’s verbal deployment as a discursive means of rejecting the
entire premise of a critical question or an issue. This usage evokes
scenes in which the former President Trump used the term at
White House press brieﬁng when he wished to dismiss a question
entirely.
It is important to note that nearly two-thirds of the top 500
tweets do not have a clear political intent which is partly a
function of the nature of the medium. Several of the top
tweets, for example, contain merely the name of a newspaper
columnist and a headline, “GOLDSTEIN: Political promises on
climate change are fake news.” This is an example of a tweet
which
we
categorized
as
unclear
both
in
terms
of
its
characterization of climate change and its political intent. The
headline points to a more sophisticated usage of the fake news
signiﬁer, and we can suppose that the columnist may not directly
be questioning the scientiﬁc consensus but rather casting doubt
on the political feasibility of promises around mitigation. To
make any deﬁnite conclusions, however, would require analysing
the full article.
In general, the ﬁndings of this study conﬁrm that former
United States President Trump and his singular reach and
inﬂuence on Twitter play a central role in amplifying the term
“fake news” and its discursive and polarizing power with respect
to the climate debate. The most-retweeted post, for example,
comes from a user who tags Trump’s account in his denunciation
of CNN, concluding with, “You stated that Climate Change
helped ISIS . . . Really? Really? OMG your channel is TRASH!
#FakeNewsCNN.” Our ﬁndings on the most mentioned users also
show clear political polarization. For instance, the most
mentioned user in the entire dataset is United States President
Trump (n  1,629)—followed closely by CNN (n  1,596).
Here, we can surmise that CNN’s segment included reference
to the frequently-cited notion that droughts potentially made
TABLE 1 | The main categories and political tone of the most retweeted posts.
No
Categories
Frequency
Percentage
1
Anthropogenic
157
31.4
2
Natural cycle or not occurring
279
55.8
3
Unclear
64
12.8
No
Political Tone
Frequency
Percentage
1
Anti-Liberal or Anti-Democrat
121
24.2
2
Anti-conservative or Anti-Republican
62
12.4
3
Unclear target/none
317
63.4
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
November 2021 | Volume 6 | Article 729818
6
Al-Rawi et al.
Twitter’s Fake News Discourses


worse by climate change in the Middle East assisted the outbreak
and severity of Syria’s civil war, which in turn contributed to the
expansion of ISIS (Wilson, 2017). The evidence of this sort of
chain of causation, however, is largely beside the point, as tweets
like this one point to the notion that climate change is often
interpreted as part of a constellation of signiﬁers, eliciting a
basically emotionally response in which the allegation of “fake
news” serves as a way of dismissing the substance of a media
report out of hand.
Our digital method investigation of the entire dataset shows
similar ﬁndings regarding the focus on CNN and liberals. For
instance, Table 2 lists the most used hashtags, and we can see that
the second top hashtag is #fakenewscnn (n  1,462), and the word
CNN is also the 5th most used word (n  3,202) followed by many
associated negative terms often used against liberals such as “lies”
(n  1,664), “liar” (n  1,365), “arson” (n  1,364), “disgusting”
(n  685), “hoax” (n  562), and “arsonists” (n  445). For
example, one of the popular retweeted posts states: “@CNN
Who’s behind the ﬁre’s pushing climate change lies CNN????
Fake news”. The examination of trigrams (three words together)
also shows similar results as the top phrase in the list is “fake news
CNN” (n  1,508) followed by similar ones like “channel trash
fakenewscnn” (n  1,459) “arson climate change” (n  698),
“disgusting democrats always” (n  676). Though some of the
most recurrent hashtags and words carry a clear anti-liberal tone,
Table 2 also shows a few opposite hashtags that are often used by
the anti-Republican community in their attacks against Trump
and
conservative
media
such
as
#fakepresident,
#illegitimatepresident, and #boycottmurdoch.
To answer the second research question, the results illustrate
the term’s importance beyond, yet in connection with, the context
of United States politics. Many of the most-retweeted posts refer
to the massive Australia wildﬁres of 2019–2020, often now
referred to as the Black Summer, and debates over the ﬁres’
causation and relationship to climate change. For instance, one
tweet condemns United States Democratic Congresswomen
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez for linking the Australian ﬁres with
climate change, declaring, “It was ARSON! Not climate change!
She is a liar!” This is an example of a common phenomenon: a
signiﬁcant number of the top tweets connected denying of human
agency in climate change with political attacks against liberal,
Democratic or left-of-center political actors, and the recurrent
phrase cited above on “disgusting democrats” is one example of
this form of polarization. Our digital method investigation of the
top most mentioned users show that some famous politicians are
found
in
the
top
20
list
including
the
United
States
Congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez who is the 5th and
8th most mentioned user (@RepAOC and @AOC) (n  1,403).
References to other politicians include Hillary Clinton (n  104)
and the Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison, while a few
other liberal media outlets are also included in the top mentioned
users like the Telegraph (n  1,078) and Global News (n  230).
In carrying out this analysis, attention to national context was
important. In Australia, for instance, the government led by
Liberal Party prime minister Scott Morrison is largely viewed
as conservative and often associated with denial about the severity
of climate change. Although United States political categories
often dominate the polarized debate online over climate change,
the precise meaning of terms vary greatly across jurisdictions. For
instance, Table 2 shows one common hashtag which is “Where
We Go One We Go All” or wwg1wga (n  31) that is frequently
used by the far-right conspiracy group called QAnon.
TABLE 2 | The top 50 most mentioned hashtags.
No
Hashtags
Count
No
Hashtags
Count
1
fakenews
2045
26
realfood
40
2
fakenewscnn
1,462
27
cop25
37
3
wearethenews
231
28
india
34
4
climatechange
149
29
wwg1wga
31
5
climatehoax
138
30
coronavirus
31
6
cdnpoli
138
31
bushﬁresaustralia
28
7
globalwarming
106
32
climatechangehoax
27
8
auspol
100
33
kag
26
9
arsonemergency
96
34
maga
25
10
ableg
94
35
trump
25
11
abpoli
93
36
presidenttrump
24
12
bushﬁrecrisisaustralia
92
37
detoxthealgorithm
24
13
onevoice1
83
38
yqrcc
23
14
savetheearth
68
39
ge2020
23
15
weallcandosomethingaboutit
68
40
climateaction
23
16
startnow
68
41
yqr
23
17
vicfallsisnotdry
57
42
resist
23
18
fake
57
43
snp
23
19
fakeclimate
53
44
australianbushﬁresdisaster
22
20
fakeoutrage
53
45
dublincentral
22
21
climateemergency
50
46
boycottmurdoch
21
22
fakepresident
50
47
theirabc
21
23
illegitimatepresident
50
48
gretathunberg
20
24
australianﬁres
41
49
bushﬁreaustralia
20
25
lchf
40
50
australiaonﬁre
20
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
November 2021 | Volume 6 | Article 729818
7
Al-Rawi et al.
Twitter’s Fake News Discourses


Unsurprisingly, given that climate change denial accounted
for a majority of the top 500 retweets, our research identiﬁed fully
twice as much anti-liberal or Democratic (24.2%) political intent
in the tweets as anti-conservative or Republican (12.4%), while
the remaining 63.4% of the top 500 tweets were classiﬁed either as
unclear or as having no speciﬁc political target. As noted, speciﬁc
attacks on Democratic or left-of-center political actors were often
paired with tweets dismissing climate change as “fake news.”
Characteristic of this type is the following tweet response to
former Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton: “Fake
news Not climate change 200 Arsonists.” Table 2 also lists some
of the recurrent hashtags used by this community such as
#climatehoax, # fakeclimate, and #climatechangehoax.
Similarly, though less frequently, advocates of tougher action
to mitigate climate change sometimes pair their analysis of “fake
news” with an explicit political message. For instance, one user
states, “Tory idiot Heather Wheeler has been feeding a fake claim
that arsonists are behind the Australian ﬁres. Fake news spread by
climate change deniers.” Again, Table 2 lists some of the common
hashtags that this community, which often attacks anti-climate
change
deniers,
often
employs
like
#weallcandosomethingaboutit,
#climateemergency,
and
#climateaction.
In conclusion, the results indicate that the discussion around
climate change and fake news is highly polarized not only in
connection to the United States but also in other Western
countries like Australia. The majority of the most retweeted
posts had either no clear target or no political tone, but tweets
carrying anti-Liberal or anti-Democratic messages were double
the number of tweets that were anti-conservative or anti-
Republican. The ﬁndings also show that over half the most
retweeted posts (55.8%) claim that climate change is a natural
cycle or deny it is even happening, while about a third of the posts
(31.4%) claim that climate change is anthropogenic.
Future research can focus on analyzing the content of
newspaper articles containing the terms “fake news” and
“climate
change”
which
would
likely
turn
up
more
complementary results in terms of seeing how proponents of
different political agendas are deploying these terms. However,
analysis of large social media datasets like this one can serve as a
guide for further media research and analysis especially during
the COVID-19 pandemic.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions presented in the study are publicly
available. This data can be found here: https://doi.org/10.6084/
m9.ﬁgshare.16574807.v1.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors listed have made a substantial, direct, and intellectual
contribution to the work and approved it for publication.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council (SSHRC) (grant # 430-2018-0769) which
funded the research project “Climate Change and Digital
Media. A mixed topography of the hashtag #climatechange on
Twitter”. This paper is one the outcomes of this research project.
REFERENCES
Al-Rawi, A., Kane, O., and Bizimana, A.-J. (2021). Topic Modelling of public
Twitter discourses, part bot, part active human user, on climate change
and global warming. J. Environ. Media 2 (1), 31–53. doi:10.1386/
jem_00039_1
Al-Rawi, A. (2020). Kekistanis and the Meme War on Social Media. Jicw 3, 13, 2020
Available at. doi:10.21810/jicw.v3i1.2360 https://journals.lib.sfu.ca/index.php/
jicw/article/view/2360
Badawy, A., Ferrara, E., and Lerman, K. (2018). “Analyzing the Digital Traces of
Political Manipulation: The 2016 Russian Interference Twitter Campaign.” 2018
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis
and Mining (ASONAM), 258–265. Available at https://arxiv.org/pdf/1802.
04291.pdf.
Bain, P. G., Hornsey, M. J., Bongiorno, R., and Jeffries, C. (2012). Promoting pro-
environmental action in climate change deniers. Nat. Clim Change 2, 600–603.
Available
at.
doi:10.1038/nclimate1532
https://www.nature.com/articles/
nclimate1532
Berghel, H. (2017). “Alt-News and Post-Truths in the ‘Fake News’ Era”. Computer
50 (3), 110–114. doi:10.1109/mc.2017.104
Burkhardt, C. (2017). Einfach Gehirn einschalten: Warum wir denken, wie
wir denken. Libr. Tech. Rep. 53 (8), 37–60. doi:10.1007/978-3-658-
11188-5_2
Chomsky, N., and Herman, E. (1998). Manufacturing Consent: The Political
Economy of the Mass Media. New York: Pantheon Books.
CNN (2020). Facebook shuts down network of fake accounts tied to employees of
Brazil’s Bolsonaro and sons. .” CNN.com, 9 July 2020. Available at: https://www.
cnn.com/2020/07/09/americas/brazil-bolsonaro-facebook-fake-accounts-intl/
index.html.
Cook, J., Supran, G., Lewandowsky, S., Oreskes, N., and Maibach, E. (2019).
America Misled: How the fossil fuel industry deliberately misled Americans about
climate change. Fairfax, VA: George Mason University Center for Climate
Change
Communication.
Available
at
https://www.
climatechangecommunication.org/america-misled/.
Eysenbach, G. (2017). “Credibility of Health Information and Digital Media: New
Perspectives and Implications for Youth,” in Digital Media, Youth, and
Credibility. Editors M. J. Metzger and J. Andrew (Cambridge, MA:
MacArthur Foundation Series on Digital Media and Learning The MIT
Press), 123–154. Available at https://tspace.library.utoronto.ca/bitstream/
1807/9906/6/Eysenbach2007.pdf.
Farka, J., and Schou, J. (2018). Fake News as a Floating Signiﬁer: Hegemony,
Antagonism and the Politics of Falsehood. J. Eur. Inst. Commun. Cult. 25, 3.
doi:10.1080/13183222.2018.1463047
Friedman, L., and Tabuchi, H. (2019). Following the Money that Undermines
Climate Science. New York, NY: New York Times. Available at https://www.
nytimes.com/2019/07/10/climate/nyt-climate-newsletter-cei.html.
Gandesha, S. (2020). Spectres of Fascism: Historical, Theoretical and International
Perspectives. London: Pluto Press.
Grasso, M. (2019). Oily Politics: A Critical Assessment of the Oil and Gas
Industry’s Contribution to Climate Change. Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 50,
106–115. doi:10.1016/j.erss.2018.11.017
Hall, S. (2015). Exxon knew about Climate Change almost 40 years ago.
Scientiﬁc
American.
25
October
2015.
Available
at
https://www.
scientiﬁcamerican.com/article/exxon-knew-about-climate-change-
almost-40-years-ago/.
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
November 2021 | Volume 6 | Article 729818
8
Al-Rawi et al.
Twitter’s Fake News Discourses


Hopp, T., Ferrucci, P., and Vargo, C. J. (2020). “Why Do People Share Ideologically
Extreme, False, and Misleading Content on Social Media,” in A Self-Report and
Trace Data–Based Analysis of Countermedia Content Dissemination on
Facebook and Twitter”. Human Communication Research. May 2020.
Oxford University Press. Available at https://academic.oup.com/hcr/article-
abstract/doi/10.1093/hcr/hqz022/5840447?redirectedFromfulltext.
Jacques, P. J. (2012). A general theory of climate denial. Glob. Environ. Polit., Vol. 2.
MIT
Press.
Available
at.
doi:10.1162/glep_a_00105
https://www.
mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1162/GLEP_a_00105
Kavanagh, J., and Rich, M. D. (2018). Truth Decay: An Initial Exploration of the
Diminishing Role of Facts and Analysis in American Public Life. California:
RAND Corporation.
Krippendorff, K. (2011). Computing Krippendorff’s Alpha-Reliability. Retrieved
from http://repository.upenn.edu/asc_papers/43.
LaFrance, A. (2020). “The Prophecies of Q.” the Atlantic. June 2020. Available at
https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2020/06/qanon-nothing-can-
stop-what-is-coming/610567/.
Leonard, C. (2019). Kochland: The Secret History of Koch Industries and Corporate
Power in America. Simon: Simon & Schuster.
Malina, M. A., Nørreklit, H. S. O., and Selto, F. H. (2011). Lessons learned:
advantages and disadvantages of Mixed Method research. Qual. Res Acc Man 8
(1), 59–71. doi:10.1108/11766091111124702
Marwick, A., and Lewis, R. (2017). Media Manipulation and Disinformation
Online. Data and Society, 15 May 2017. Available at https://datasociety.net/
library/media-manipulation-and-disinfo-online/.
Mayer, J. (2013). “Koch pledge tied to Congressional climate inaction.” New Yorker.
30 June 2013. Available at https://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/koch-
pledge-tied-to-congressional-climate-inaction.
Miller, M. (2019). Fake News: Separating Truth from Fiction. Minneapolis: Lerner
Publishing Group.
Reid, L. (2020). “Exploring the Shocking Scale of Climate Change Misinformation.”
Brandwatch. April 2, 2020. Available at https://www.brandwatch.com/blog/
react-climate-change-fake-news/.
Ross, S., and Rivers, D. J. (2018). “Discursive Deﬂection: Accusation of ‘Fake News’
and the Spread of Mis- and Disinformation in the Tweets of President Trump.
Soc. Media + Soc. 4, 2. doi:10.1177/2056305118776010
Wilson, S. (2017). “Climate Change and the Rise of Terrorism in Northeastern
Syria Samantha Wilson.” ESSAI. Spring Vol. 15. , 2017 Article 37. Available at
https://dc.cod.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article1637&contextessai.
Worland, J. (2019). “Donald Trump called climate change a hoax. Now he’s
awkwardly boasting about ﬁghting it.” TIME. 8 July . Available at https://
time.com/5622374/donald-trump-climate-change-hoax-event/.
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s Note: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their afﬁliated organizations, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in
this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2021 Al-Rawi, OʼKeefe, Kane and Bizimana. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC
BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with
these terms.
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
November 2021 | Volume 6 | Article 729818
9
Al-Rawi et al.
Twitter’s Fake News Discourses
