UvA-DARE is a service provided by the library of the University of Amsterdam (https://dare.uva.nl)
UvA-DARE (Digital Academic Repository)
Hashtag activism and the configuration of counterpublics: Dutch animal welfare
debates on Twitter
Wonneberger, A.; Hellsten, I.R.; Jacobs, S.H.J.
DOI
10.1080/1369118X.2020.1720770
Publication date
2021
Document Version
Final published version
Published in
Information, Communication & Society
License
CC BY-NC-ND
Link to publication
Citation for published version (APA):
Wonneberger, A., Hellsten, I. R., & Jacobs, S. H. J. (2021). Hashtag activism and the
configuration of counterpublics: Dutch animal welfare debates on Twitter. Information,
Communication & Society, 24(12), 1694-1711.
https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2020.1720770
General rights
It is not permitted to download or to forward/distribute the text or part of it without the consent of the author(s)
and/or copyright holder(s), other than for strictly personal, individual use, unless the work is under an open
content license (like Creative Commons).
Disclaimer/Complaints regulations
If you believe that digital publication of certain material infringes any of your rights or (privacy) interests, please
let the Library know, stating your reasons. In case of a legitimate complaint, the Library will make the material
inaccessible and/or remove it from the website. Please Ask the Library: https://uba.uva.nl/en/contact, or a letter
to: Library of the University of Amsterdam, Secretariat, P.O. Box 19185, 1000 GD Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
You will be contacted as soon as possible.
Download date:09 Mar 2026


Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rics20
Information, Communication & Society
ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rics20
Hashtag activism and the configuration of
counterpublics: Dutch animal welfare debates on
Twitter
Anke Wonneberger, Iina R. Hellsten & Sandra H. J. Jacobs
To cite this article: Anke Wonneberger, Iina R. Hellsten & Sandra H. J. Jacobs (2021) Hashtag
activism and the configuration of counterpublics: Dutch animal welfare debates on Twitter,
Information, Communication & Society, 24:12, 1694-1711, DOI: 10.1080/1369118X.2020.1720770
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2020.1720770
© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group
Published online: 04 Feb 2020.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 5869
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 5 View citing articles 


Hashtag activism and the conﬁguration of counterpublics:
Dutch animal welfare debates on Twitter
Anke Wonneberger
, Iina R. Hellsten
and Sandra H. J. Jacobs
Amsterdam School of Communication Research (ASCoR), University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands
ABSTRACT
Social media platforms provide major opportunities for online
activism and the emergence of digital counterpublics. Research on
counterpublics has focused on actors and their narrative strategies
aiming at deconstructing dominant discourses. Less attention has
been paid to how the interplay between actors and platform-
speciﬁc functions aﬀects the conﬁgurations and therewith also the
success of digital counterpublics. Existing studies mainly rely on
determining up front
which topics, actor characteristics,
or
arguments constitute hashtag activism and digital counterpublics.
In contrast, our approach allows for an empirical identiﬁcation
based on how actors position themselves in an online debate
toward other actors and their shared hashtags. We argue that
online activism is co-constituted by actors and their usage of
hashtags,
actor
mentions,
and
retweets.
Applying
a
communicative network perspective allows for the integration of
semantic and relational research traditions. We combine a recently
developed automated network analysis method and content
analysis to analyze two Twitter debates about animal welfare
issues. Our results show that among Twitter users, citizens and
environmental organizations formed a common cluster whereas
media actors formed their own sub-clusters in both debates. The
ﬁndings
emphasize
the
central
role
of
citizens
for
the
conﬁguration of digital counterpublics. The proposed approach
can be further adapted and applied more widely for the analysis
of online activism and debates.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 23 May 2019
Accepted 16 January 2020
KEYWORDS
hashtag activism; digital
counterpublics; network
analysis; Twitter; aﬀordances;
animal welfare
Introduction
Recently, ‘hashtag activism’ has been used to describe the networks of social media mess-
ages that use a common hashtagged term with a social claim (Tombleson & Wolf, 2017;
Xiong, Cho, & Boatwright, 2019; Yang, 2016). The use of shared hashtags by minorities or
activist groups can be considered as a strategy toward creating and propagating counter-
publics, or alternative public spheres (Fraser, 1990). With their potential to inﬂuence
dominant perspectives, counterpublics can be considered an important driver for social
© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is properly cited, and is not altered, transformed, or built upon in any way.
CONTACT Anke Wonneberger
a.wonneberger@uva.nl
Amsterdam School of Communication Research (ASCoR),
University of Amsterdam, P.O. Box 15793 1001 NG, Amsterdam, Netherlands
INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION & SOCIETY
2021, VOL. 24, NO. 12, 1694–1711
https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2020.1720770


change (Downey & Fenton, 2003). Counterpublics can be identiﬁed by their communica-
tive space (e.g., media type or platform), distinct discursive patterns, and participants
(Toepﬂ& Piwoni, 2015). Following these three features, empirical research so far has
mainly focused on predeﬁned counterpublic spheres and assessed their potential to coun-
tering dominant discourses by either describing discursive patterns or analyzing networks
of speciﬁc movements or organizations (Kaiser, 2017; Milioni, 2009; Wimmer, 2005).
Increasingly, attention has been paid to the question of how digital counterpublics emerge
and are positioned as distinct communicative spaces within broader structures of public
spheres or as distinct from dominant media discourses (Choi & Cho, 2017; Piela, 2017;
Toepﬂ& Piwoni, 2015). A number of recent studies have combined automated network
analysis and manual quantitative or qualitative content analysis to explore the dynamics
of meaning creation within counter-public debates (Jackson & Foucault Welles, 2016;
Ogan & Varol, 2017). The present study adds to this line of research. Taking a media aﬀor-
dances perspective (Evans, Pearce, Vitak, & Treem, 2017), we argue that the constitutive
character of hashtags in addition to @username handles and retweets decisively contrib-
utes to how digital counterpublics are conﬁgured and, consequently, also to their success
to reach a wider public beyond the initial movement. Hashtags were found to raise aware-
ness and promote discussion, thereby stimulating engagement between social movement
organizations and the public (Tombleson & Wolf, 2017; Xiong et al., 2019). So far, how-
ever, little is known about the interrelationships between diﬀerent platform-speciﬁc
functions.
We propose a network-based approach to relate hashtag activism to the conﬁguration
of counterpublics building on a recently developed communicative network approach to
analyze online debates on Twitter (Hellsten, Jacobs, & Wonneberger, 2019). This
approach may complement existing modes of studying counterpublics by more strongly
focusing on the role of actors and hashtags for the scope and conﬁguration of a debate.
Moreover, this allows an empirical demarcation of counterpublics based on how actors
position themselves in an online debate toward other actors as well their shared hashtags.
We analyze two animal-welfare debates on Twitter in the Netherlands for a two-year
period. The ﬁrst debate is on over-fed chickens (‘plofkippen’) that are bred to grow fast
resulting in physical problems (Wakker Dier, 2017a). The second debate is on kilo stun-
ners (‘kiloknallers’): meat without animal welfare quality marks that is promoted for low
prices (Wakker Dier, 2017b). Both debates originate from social countermarketing cam-
paigns (Bellew, Bauman, Freeman, & Kite, 2017) and are characterized by active debates
on social media and a wide range of participating actors.
Digital counterpublics
The public sphere has been described as a fragmented network of communication
enabling negotiation and deliberation concerning societal issues and as such representing
a vital element for democratic societies (Habermas, 1996; Papacharissi, 2002). While
conﬂict is inherent to all public spheres, the idea of counterpublics emphasizes biases in
mainstream publics due to social inequalities or power struggles and the countering of
these by alternative discursive practices that critique and challenge dominant public dis-
courses and socio-cultural norms (Downey & Fenton, 2003; Fraser, 1990). The emergence
of counterpublics is thereby closely tied to civil society actors, such as non-governmental
INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION & SOCIETY
1695


organizations (NGOs), or in a more general sense to social movements which can involve
multiple organizations and individuals (Choi & Cho, 2017; Milioni, 2009). Representatives
of civil society are considered vital elements in public discourses because of their auton-
omous character, distance to formal decision making (Ferree, Gamson, Gerhards, &
Rucht, 2002), and potential to bring marginalized groups and viewpoints to the attention
of wider publics and inﬂuence dominant perspectives (Downey & Fenton, 2003). While
counterpublics are by no means a novel phenomenon, a crucial potential of social
media for them is their ability to engage larger publics, connect diverse elite and non-
elite actor groups, and coordinate action (Bennett, 2012). Central features supporting
this potential include their openness – reﬂected by the wealth of information and diversity
of viewpoints – and accessibility – due to the absence of gate-keeping mechanisms and
potential empowerment of peripheral groups (e.g., Schäfer, 2015).
A main aim of counter-public discourses is the deconstruction of dominant or main-
stream discourses and the strengthening of a sense of collective identity among partici-
pants (Toepﬂ& Piwoni, 2015). Accordingly, the most prominent strand of empirical
research assesses the potential of various communication platforms for deliberative or
democratic functions of counterpublics, such as participatory online journalism (Kaiser,
2017; Toepﬂ& Piwoni, 2015), social media (Choi & Cho, 2017; Piela, 2017), user-gener-
ated video platforms (Milliken, Gibson, & O’Donnell, 2008), or alternative blogospheres
(Riegert & Ramsay, 2013). In these studies, actors participating in counterpublics are
often predeﬁned, for example, as representatives of minority perspectives, such as climate
skepticism (Kaiser, 2017) or wearing a niqab (Piela, 2017), or more generally, presenting
arguments that counter mainstream discourses or identities (Toepﬂ& Piwoni, 2015).
While these studies have focused on representational or semantic aspects of counter-
publics, other studies have followed a more relational approach. Research focused on
speciﬁc organizations or social movements has assessed the discursive or democratic
potential of counterpublic spheres by analyzing structural conditions, the role of individ-
ual actors (e.g., Milioni, 2009; Wimmer, 2005) or transnational advocacy networks (Ben-
nett, 2012). Building upon the concept of hashtag activism, we propose an approach that
combines semantic and relational approaches and may thus complement existing modes
of studying digital counterpublics. Speciﬁcally, we focus on the positioning of actors: We
describe counterpublics as a result of the interaction between actors and hashtags and the
distinct roles of active and passive actors in this process.
Counterpublics on Twitter
In the present study, we focus on Twitter as a social media platform that is characterized
by networks of connected topics and actors (Hellsten et al., 2019). Typically, network-ana-
lytic research on Twitter activism separates social and semantic networks (Chen, Tu, &
Zheng, 2017; Xiong et al., 2019). To enrich the typically automated methods of big-data
or network analysis, increasingly approaches have been proposed of combining automated
methods and manual content analysis (Theocharis, Lowe, Van Deth, & García-Albacete,
2015). Such approaches result in socio-semantic networks that combine both relational
and meaning-related facets of online debates. Research has, for instance, included frames
in a socio-semantic network analysis to detect patterns of opinion leadership (Lycarião &
dos Santos, 2017; Ogan & Varol, 2017). Following an alternative approach, we combine
1696
A. WONNEBERGER ET AL.


network analysis and manual content analysis to discern the role of diﬀerent actor groups
for the conﬁguration of digital counterpublics including their positioning as active or pas-
sive actors and interrelationships with hashtags. Taking a media aﬀordance perspective,
we focus on three Twitter-speciﬁc functions: hashtags as a representation of sub-topics
(semantic dimension); addressed actors as a representation of social networks between
Twitter users (relational dimension), and retweets as information spreading and potential
ampliﬁcation of the debates (intensifying dimension) (see also Barisione, Micailidou, &
Airoldi, 2019; Tremayne, 2014). Moreover, we emphasize the interrelation between
these three dimensions.
Digital counterpublics constituted by hashtag activism
The term hashtag activism has recently been coined to describe aims to raise awareness for
social issues and the encouragement of debates via hashtags on social media (Xiong et al.,
2019). Hashtags were initially introduced on Twitter as a user-initiated practice to categor-
ize – or tag – posts as belonging to a speciﬁc group, topic, or discussion but are now also
used on other social media platforms. Their prime function for digital discourses thus
relates to the semantic level. From a media aﬀordance perspective, however, hashtags
function beyond a mere categorization of information but contribute to the co-creation
of meaning emphasizing their performative or constitutional character (Albu & Etter,
2016; Evans et al., 2017). Moreover, the use of hashtags establishes relations between var-
ious actors (Bennett & Segerberg, 2012). By creating hypertextuality, that is interlinking
various texts and actors, hashtags can relate diﬀerent perspectives, create or reproduce
relationships between actors, and contribute to the course of online discourses (Albu &
Etter, 2016). Empirical accounts of hashtag activism have focused on minority or
human rights debates, such as #Ferguson (Jackson & Foucault Welles, 2016), LGBT rights
(Tombleson & Wolf, 2017), #BlackLivesMatter (Yang, 2016), and #MeToo (Xiong et al.,
2019). Highlighting both semantic and relational aspects, hashtags were identiﬁed as a
means to raise awareness and promote discussion, thereby stimulating engagement
between social movement organizations and the public (Tombleson & Wolf, 2017;
Xiong et al., 2019).
The aﬀordance approach can be further expanded to other linguistic conventions. In
addition to linking topics or information, social media oﬀer speciﬁc manners of embed-
ding actors, such as via the handle @username. Beyond merely representing references
to other actors – a relational function we can also ﬁnd in other media texts – @username
automatically signiﬁes the respective user as being included in a post. This way, actor refer-
ences fulﬁll a pragmatic function inviting passively mentioned actors to change their role
and actively respond or contribute to a debate. Moreover, it allows other users to directly
access the proﬁles of the referenced actors increasing the transparency and traceability of
debates. By embedding passive actors in a speciﬁc context of a digital discourse, this rela-
tional function is intertwined with the semantic level. So can hashtags and @mentions be
purposefully employed to create mutual awareness among actors (Tremayne, 2014).
Finally, speciﬁcally on Twitter, the function of retweets further contributes to hypertex-
tuality. Retweets intensify discourses by employing and combining semantic and relational
functions. Passing on original posts helps to further disseminate messages and their
authors. The selection process can, thereby, either reinforce or alter the focus of a debate.
INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION & SOCIETY
1697


Speciﬁcally, citizens have been found to propagate digital movements in this manner (Bar-
isione et al., 2019).
All three Twitter functions, hashtags, @usernames, and retweets have been marked as
important elements for scale shift during the formation of social movements (Tremayne,
2014). But they can also help to understand the shift from collective to connective action
(Bennett & Segerberg, 2012). A recently introduced communicative network approach inte-
grates these Twitter-speciﬁc functions and thus allows a systematic assessment of their usage
within online debates (Hellsten et al., 2019; Hellsten & Leydesdorﬀ, 2020). Drawing on
socio-semantic network analysis, this approach assesses the triangular relationships between
active actors (authors or users) and passive actors (addressees referred to via @username or
the retweet function RT@username) and topics (marked by hashtags). As opposed to deter-
mining up front which actor characteristics or argument types constitute counterpublics, our
approach allows for an empirical identiﬁcation based on how actors position themselves in
an online debate toward other actors as well their shared hashtags. Speciﬁcally, counterpub-
lics may be identiﬁed as communicative clusters that can be observed as distinct from com-
municative activities of elite actors, such as media or political actors. Explicitly considering
counterpublics as networks of actors and topics brings us close to the original deﬁnition of
the public sphere as a network (Habermas, 1996). Moreover, in the context of counterpub-
lics, it is interesting to examine the position of civil society actors (Ferree et al., 2002) and
citizens (Barisione et al., 2019; Papacharissi, 2002).
Twitter debates about animal welfare
The production and consumption of food in contemporary Western societies have trig-
gered heated debates on social media (Stevens, Aarts, Termeer, & Dewulf, 2018). Food
safety for consumers, the consequences of production methods for the environment,
and animal welfare are some of the topics. In the Netherlands, several incidents occurred
in the last decennium, such as horse meat sold as beef, salmonella-infected salmon, and
recently a prohibited pesticide was found in eggs. In this context, the two debates sur-
rounding over-fed chickens (plofkippen) and kilo stunners (kiloknallers) can be considered
as long-term issues, as opposed to short-term incidents, allowing us to follow these debates
over a longer period of time. Moreover, both issues are characterized by a central cam-
paign term that is used as hashtag on Twitter rendering them suitable to study hashtag
activism. With a focus on critique on bio-industrial production methods these two issues
can be understood as social countermarketing (Bellew et al., 2017), as they form an oppo-
sition to ongoing commercial marketing of the food sector as well as socio-cultural norms
regarding animal welfare, meat production and consumption. Both issues were initiated
and facilitated by animal welfare and other environmental organizations and involved a
wide range of actors.
The kilo stunner issue was initiated as a social countermarketing campaign by animal
welfare organization Wakker Dier (alert animal) in 2010. The campaign focused on adver-
tisements of large quantities of low-priced meat without animal welfare quality marks and
thus directly targeted supermarkets and their sales oﬀers (Wakker Dier, 2017a). Campaign
messages from Wakker Dier and other organizations typically addressed supermarkets
and other industry actors related to livestock breeding. In addition, appeals aimed at
increasing public awareness and changing consumer attitudes and behaviors.
1698
A. WONNEBERGER ET AL.


In contrast to this consumer focus, the second debate more strongly targeted the pro-
duction and processing of meat. The term over-fed chicken (plofkip) ﬁrst appeared in a
consumer program on Dutch television in 2001. Over-fed chickens refer to consumption
chickens that are bred to grow fast – their lifespan is about six weeks – and consequently
develop physical problems, such as heart diseases (Wakker Dier, 2017b). In 2012, Wakker
Dier initiated a campaign directly targeting restaurant chains, popular food brands, and
supermarkets with the goal of stopping the processing and selling of this type of meat
and promoting chicken that conforms to higher animal welfare standards. The diﬀerence
between a consumer and a production focus may have consequences for the formation of
counterpublics in relation to these issues, speciﬁcally, regarding the role of individual citi-
zens. Stevens, Aarts, and Dewulf (2019) have already established that plofkip severed as a
master term in the public debate as reﬂected by news media, policy documents, and Twit-
ter and have encouraged a more detailed analysis of its function in the social media debate.
Our empirical research questions, ﬁrst, concern the emergence and development of
online debates: RQ1: Which actors participated in the Twitter debate on kilo stunners
and over-fed chicken, by authoring Twitter messages, and how did their involvement in
the debates develop over time? Second, regarding the identiﬁcation of counterpublics:
RQ2: Which topics co-occurred with which addressed actors in the Twitter messages and
which counterpublic clusters can be identiﬁed in these networks? Third, concerning the
aspect of intensifying: RQ3: Which actor groups retweeted whose messages on Twitter?
Method
Sample
The Twitter data were collected with the commercial software tool Coosto using the search
terms ‘plofkip’ and ‘kiloknaller’ for the period from July 2015 to June 2017. Coosto is a
commercial web monitoring tool that crawls and archives Twitter (and other social
media) posts that have been sent by Dutch Twitter users. We used Coosto for the data col-
lection as it allowed us to search in the Twitter archive and therefore collect tweets for the
past two years, which is diﬃcult when using other existing software tools and scrapers,
such as Webometric Analyst (Thelwall, 2009). In addition, our focus was on Dutch online
discussions which are covered by this tool. A total of 19,418 Twitter messages (plofkip:
18,631; kiloknaller: 7687) were downloaded in August 2017. To obtain a comparable
sample and a sample size that is suitable for manual coding, a diﬀerent threshold of a mini-
mum number of posts per author was applied for each case. Moreover, during the coding
process, all tweets that were not related to the actual issues were removed. For the kilo
stunner debate, all authors who posted ≥5 tweets were included (N = 1404; 18%). For
the over-fed chicken debate, only those authors with ≥15 tweets were included (N =
2107; 11%). The comparison of the timelines of the full and sub-samples indicated that
these selections represented a good reﬂection of the developments over time for each case.
Author coding
We coded the author accounts according to the actor types based on the Twitter users’ self-
descriptions on their Twitter user account. Also links to websites on the user account were
INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION & SOCIETY
1699


taken into account. The actors were coded into eight categories: citizens, environmental
organizations, media, political actors, public organizations, conventional industry, eco
industry, and other. After several rounds of coder training and adjustments of the code-
book, intercoder agreement was assessed based on a randomly selected subsample of 11%
(n = 33) of the total author sample. Krippendorﬀ’s nominal α of 0.87 reﬂected a suﬃcient
level of inter-coder reliability.
Hashtag, retweet, and username networks
We focused in particular on the three main Twitter aﬀordances as indications of inter-
actions in the debates: #hashtags as representations of topics: @username mentions as
addressing other Twitter users, and retweeting using RT@username as an indication of
debate intensiﬁcation. We present the results of co-occurring hashtags and addressed user-
names for the most prominent actor groups, and separately the RT@username networks
for the same ﬁve actor types in both debates.
For the network analysis, we used the automated tool tweet.exe to calculate asymmetri-
cal network matrices (Hellsten & Leydesdorﬀ, 2020). We used #hashtags, @usernames,
and RT@usernames as variables and the Twitter messages as documents for constructing
asymmetrical network matrices of the words versus the documents. The method builds
upon an automated tool for mapping co-occurring words in text documents (Leydesdorﬀ
& Hellsten, 2006), focusing on co-occurrences between the speciﬁc type of words, hash-
tags, retweets, and addressed usernames (Hellsten & Leydesdorﬀ, 2020).
The network analysis proceeded in three steps. First, we used the open-access software rou-
tine frqtwt.exe to produce word-frequency lists of the words used in the Twitter messages. We
selected the words indicating #hashtag, RT@username, or @username from the word frequency
list for further analysis. Second, the automated tweet.exe tool was used to calculate the network
matrices of the selected words and the Twitter message documents. Third, we visualized the
resulting word/document matrices with the open social network analysis tool Pajek (De
Nooy, Mrvar, & Batagelj, 2011) using the Kamada-Kawai layout algorithm (Kamada &
Kawai, 1989). We then exported the networks to VosViewer and used the Newman modularity
algorithm (Newman, 2004; Noack, 2007) for the clustering (Van Eck & Waltman, 2011).
Analytical approach
To provide an overview of the course of the debate, we ﬁrst looked at a number of tweets
posted per actor type per month. Next, an overview of total numbers of hashtags, men-
tioned usernames, and retweeted usernames per actor type gave a ﬁrst account of how
these Twitter functions were used in the debates. In order to analyze how the diﬀerent
actor types made use of hashtags, usernames, and retweets, we analyzed the co-occur-
rences of the hashtags, usernames, and retweets in their Twitter messages. This enabled
us to provide network visualizations of, for example, the #HASHTAGS, @usernames,
and RT@usernames, used in the Twitter messages sent by actors coded as media, environ-
mental organizations, and citizens. Such visualizations provide an overview of the simi-
larities and diﬀerences between the actor types in their use of the three Twitter-speciﬁc
functions. For reasons of readability, we use upper case to indicate the hashtags, and
lower case for addressed usernames and retweeted usernames.
1700
A. WONNEBERGER ET AL.


Results
Both the kilo stunner and over-fed chicken debate were marked by several attention peaks
throughout the sampling period of two years (Figure 1(a,b)). Both issues were typically
discussed more intensely around Christmas time and New Year’s Evening. Environmental
organizations use this time of the year to create awareness regarding problems in animal
welfare behind the meat and chicken sold in the supermarkets in general and for speciﬁc
production sites or sales oﬀers in particular. This explains the greatest peak for the kilo
stunner case between November 2015 and January 2016. In addition, in December
2015 kilo stunner became a political issue as the social democrats proposed to ban
cheap meet by law. This proposal was vividly discussed, and also other political parties
and actors became more visible in the debate. The highest peak for the over-fed chicken
debate occurred between March and April 2016. The beginning of 2016 marked a success
for the campaign with changes initialized by several supermarkets. In addition, ongoing
negotiations for an association agreement between the European Union and Ukraine
further spurred the discussion because over-fed chicken produced in Ukraine would
enter the Dutch market as a consequence of this agreement.
Figure 1. (a) Over-fed chicken debate: Number of sampled tweets per actor group per month (N =
2107). (b) Kilo stunner debate: Number of sampled tweets per actor group per month (N = 1404).
INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION & SOCIETY
1701


Actor involvement over time
Both debates showed a relatively similar distribution of participating actors as authors of
tweets. As initiating actor of both countermarketing campaigns, the environmental organ-
ization Wakker Dier posted the highest number of tweets in both debates (over-fed
chicken: 204; kilo stunner: 131). In both cases, only a few other environmental organiz-
ations were involved, four in the over-fed chicken, and six in the kilo stunner debate,
with considerably lower levels of activity. The environmental organization jacht_en_boer
(‘hunting_and_farming’), an organization specialized as a contact point for nature conser-
vationists, hunters, and ﬁshermen to report inappropriate online messages, was active in
both debates (over-fed chicken: 26 tweets; kilo stunner: 21 tweets). With four media actors
in the top-10 active participants, these were slightly more present in the over-fed chicken
debate compared to one media actor among the top-10 in the kilo stunner debate. Most of
the media accounts were online-only media, and newsfeeds, such as Dutchnewspapers that
forwards news from several Dutch mainstream newspapers (over-fed chicken: 50 tweets;
kilo stunner: 8 tweets). With relatively high frequencies of posts, both debates were about
equally inﬂuenced by citizen participation. In the over-fed chicken debate, 44 unique indi-
viduals posted 1002 tweets whereas in the kilo stunner debate 93 unique individuals posted
702 tweets (Table 1, unique authors per actor group).
Figure 1(a,b) shows how the diﬀerent actor groups contributed to the Twitter discus-
sions over time, in terms of number of posted tweets. Most notably, and in line with
the overall frequencies, the two issues were largely dominated by individual citizens
throughout the research period – almost half of the Twitter messages were sent by indi-
vidual citizens in both debates. With only one exception: The ﬁrst six months of the
over-fed chicken debate were dominated by media actors and citizens became the largest
group of authors only in January 2016. The lower level of attention among citizens
coincides with a limited number of tweets by environmental organizations during that
time. Besides such exceptional periods, environmental organizations continuously
belonged to the most visible actors in both debates. Other relevant actor groups, such
Table 1. Number of unique authors, hashtags, mentioned usernames, and retweeted usernames in the
over-fed chicken and kilo stunner debates.
OVER-FED CHICKEN
Authors
Hashtags
(≤5 times)
Usernames
(≤5 times)
RT usernames
(≤2 times)
Media
17
68 (18)
31 (7)
28 (8)
Citizens
44
255 (38)
225 (34)
150 (50)
Environmental organizations
5
106 (9)
99 (8)
72 (11)
Conventional industry
4
40 (1)
16 (2)
16 (4)
Eco-industry
2
15 (1)
17 (1)
10 (2)
KILO STUNNER
Authors
Hashtags
(≤5 times)
Usernames
(≤5 times)
RT usernames
(≤2 times)
Media
29
47 (15)
17 (1)
38 (5)
Citizens
93
157 (34)
143 (17)
86 (32)
Environmental organizations
7
64 (3)
52 (4)
27 (6)
Conventional industry
7
23 (1)
11 (1)
13 (4)
Eco-industry
4
17 (1)
21 (0)
6 (1)
Note. The number of hashtags, usernames, and retweeted usernames included in Figure 2(a,b) and Figure 3(a,b) in
brackets.
1702
A. WONNEBERGER ET AL.


as industry actors, in contrast, remained on a relatively low level of activity for most parts
of the research period. Only four unique industry authors were present in the over-fed
chicken debate and seven in the kilo stunner debate.
Use of hashtags, usernames, and retweets
To better understand the involvement of the diﬀerent actor groups, we looked at how they
used the three main Twitter functions in the debates. The actors used hashtags to diﬀerent
degrees (Table 1): Whereas environmental organizations used only a few unique hashtags,
citizens and media showed a greater diversity in their hashtag use. In particular, citizens
used both a higher number of hashtags and usernames, in their Twitter messages in both
debates.
Content-wise, the media mainly used hashtags related to news: #NIEUWS (#NEWS),
#NIEUWSTWITTER (#NEWSTWITTER), #PERSBERICHT (#PRESSRELEASE), or
#AD.NL (referring to a national newspaper) and to actual campaigns: #MEERMEERM-
EER (#MOREMOREMORE) and #DUSMEERGROENTEETEN (#SOEATMOREVEGE-
TABLES), but did not share hashtags with the two main actor types – beyond the general
issue-related hashtags #PLOFKIP and #KILOKNALLER. Citizens and environmental
organizations, in contrast, used several shared hashtags related to the countermarketing
campaign: #DIERENLEED (#ANIMALSUFFERING), #PLOFKIPVRIJ (#OVER-FED-
CHICKEN-FREE), or #VOEDSELTOP (#FOOD-TOP MEETING). Conventional indus-
try actors, in contrast, referred to the Netherlands implying a national frame for their sec-
tor emphasizing agriculture as important element of Dutch national identity. Ecological
industry actors used the hashtag #KLIMAAT (#CLIMATE) alluding to a greater, global
problem that is at stake.
Regarding our ﬁrst research question, we can thus conclude that both debates had the
initiating environmental organization as the most prominent organizational actor. How-
ever, the overall volume of the debates – and therewith maybe also the success of both
underlying campaigns – was driven by high rates of citizen participation, supported by
media actors. Political actors and public organizations were not actively participating in
the two debates. The central campaign terms #PLOFKIP and #KILOKNALLER, can be
considered as the hashtags with the greatest potential to link diﬀerent actor groups.
With this as an exception, the actors diﬀered substantially in the usage of their hashtags
indicating diﬀerent frames or perspectives that were taken.
A relational approach: co-occurring hashtags and usernames
To answer our second research question, we focused on the co-occurrences between topics
and addressed actors. We analyzed which topics were co-addressed by which addressed
actors, operationalized as relations between hashtags and usernames mentioned in the
Twitter messages. The resulting networks show the intensity of the co-occurrences, the
closer the nodes are to each other, the more frequently they were used together in the
tweets. The node size, in turn, represents the frequency that the hashtag, the username,
or the retweet was used in the set of Twitter messages ‘authored’ by the actor category.
We ﬁrst focused on how the ﬁve most prominent actors, media, citizens, environmental
organizations, conventional industry, and eco-industry used hashtags and usernames. In
INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION & SOCIETY
1703


the over-fed chicken debate, citizens and environmental organizations appeared clustered
together showing similar tweeting behavior (Figure 2(a)). The main campaign hashtag
#PLOFKIP (#OVER-FED CHICKEN) is positioned centrally in the network, and used
by citizens, media, and environmental organizations. The initiating organization Wakker
Figure 2. (a) Co-occurring 67 hashtags and 45 addressed usernames (used ≤5 times) in the over-fed
chicken debate authored by media, citizens, environmental organizations, eco industry, conventional
industry. Kamada-Kawai layout in Pajek, clustering with Newman algorithm in VosViewer, node size
proportional to frequency of use, line thickness to strength of co-occurrence. (b) Co-occurring 57 hash-
tags and 26 addressed usernames (used ≤5 times) in the kilo stunner debate authored by media, citi-
zens, environmental organizations, eco industry, conventional industry. Kamada-Kawai layout in Pajek,
clustering with Newman algorithm in VosViewer. Node size proportional to frequency of use, line thick-
ness to strength of co-occurrence.
1704
A. WONNEBERGER ET AL.


Dier and its relation to the campaign term #PLOFKIP formed the center of the debate: the
main actors addressing @WakkerDier were citizens (red) and media actors (blue).
Whereas the media used news-related hashtags that are unique to this actor type
(#NIEUWS, #AD.NL, #NEWSFEIT on the right-hand side), and addressed other media
actors (@blikopener333), citizens and environmental organizations referred to the most
important opponents addressed by the campaign (e.g., two restaurant chains McDonald’s
and Preston Palace) together with campaign-related hashtags such as #DIERENLEED
(#ANIMALSUFFERING, left-hand side). The map visualizes how hashtags as sub-topics
of the campaign were used to speciﬁcally target some of the industry actors (e.g., #HAP-
PYMEAL for McDonald’s). Industry actors complying with animal welfare standards, in
contrast, were situated at the periphery of the network and linked to more positive terms
(such as food labels, organic production, vegetarianism). This group of addressed actors
was not central, not discussed frequently, and referred to mainly as counterexamples or
examples for the success of the campaign. Also, references to traditional news media actors
(newspapers and television programs, such as @volkskrant or @telegraaf) had a more per-
ipheral position in the network. Low levels of attention to these media actors can be
explained by occasional coverage of the issue that was then used to further promote the
campaign on Twitter.
Similar to the over-fed chicken debate, in the kilo stunner debate, the main campaign
hashtag #KILOKNALLER was central to the network, and used by the citizens, the media
and the environmental organizations (Figure 2(b)). Most importantly, citizens and
environmental organizations again appeared as one cluster displaying similar tweeting
behavior. Citizens and environmental organizations addressed targeted supermarkets
both with hashtags (e.g., #SUPERMARKTEN #BOYCOTEMTE) and addressed user-
names (@emte, @desupermarkt) (left upper corner). The media, again, formed an inde-
pendent
cluster
and
mainly
used
news-related
hashtags
(#NIEUWS,
#NIEUWSTWITTER #ACTUEEL, left-hand side) in addition to the main campaign hash-
tag. As opposed to the over-fed chicken debate, political actors were more prominent in
the kilo stunner debate (e.g., @pvda and #PVDA referring to the labor party or references
to members of parliament: @sjoeradikkers and @mariannethieme).
In summary, in both debates, citizens were central actors, authoring tweets, and clus-
tered together with environmental organizations. The media, in turn formed their own
cluster of topics and addressed actors. Both conventional and ecological food producers
were relatively peripheral in the debates. As an answer to our second research question,
we claim that citizens and environmental organizations formed counterpublics separate
from the mainstream public spheres which were formed by media-authored Twitter
messages.
Retweets: debate intensiﬁcation
To answer our third research question, we focused on the same ﬁve actor types to present
their retweets as a potential intensiﬁcation of the debates. In the over-fed chicken debate,
citizens were very actively retweeting messages from the main organization, Wakker Dier,
and as such acted as intensiﬁers of the counterpublic (Figure 3(a)). Eco-industry mainly
retweeted messages from RT@Wakker Dier whereas conventional industry retweeted tweets
from a special poultry-related Twitter newsfeed (RT@kiepeboer – RT@chickenfarmer). The
INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION & SOCIETY
1705


media retweeted messages from other, mainly Twitter-based news media (RT@blikopener
and RT@dekoran1). Environmental organizations retweeted information from consumer
programs (RT@kassavara) and mainstream news (RT@rtlnieuws).
Figure 3. (a) Co-occurring 74 retweeted usernames (used ≤2 times) in the over-fed chicken debate
authored by media, citizens, environmental organizations, eco industry, conventional industry.
Kamada-Kawai layout in Pajek, clustering with Newman algorithm in VosViewer. Node size proportional
to frequency of use, line thickness to strength of co-occurrence. (b) Co-occurring 47 retweeted usernames
(used ≤2 times) in the kilo stunner debate authored by media, citizens, environmental organizations, eco
industry, conventional industry. Kamada-Kawai layout in Pajek, clustering with Newman algorithm in Vos-
Viewer. Node size proportional to frequency of use, line thickness to strength of co-occurrence.
1706
A. WONNEBERGER ET AL.


Also, in the kilo stunner debate, citizens were very active in retweeting messages orig-
inally sent by Wakker Dier (Figure 3(b)). In contrast to the over-fed chicken debate, the
media, environmental organizations, and conventional industry formed a cluster (lower
left-hand side), retweeting messages from the media, including also farming news
(RT@boerderij.nl). This result may point to lower levels of confrontation between
opponents and possibly more actual dialogue in the kilo stunner debate.
Discussion
This study extends current research into hashtag activism and digital counterpublics (e.g.,
Xiong et al., 2019). While previous research has focused on either semantic or relational
aspects of counterpublics, our approach emphasizes the interplay of the three Twitter-
speciﬁc linguistic functions: hashtags as an indication of semantic activities, addressing
other actors as relational dimension of counterpublics, and retweeting as intensiﬁcation
of debates. While central hashtags of the debate may be interpreted as collective action
frames (e.g., emphasizing critique on mass production) their functionality for the debates
– speciﬁcally in interaction with actor mentions and retweets – stresses the connective
logic which stresses the role of digital technologies as organizing agents (Bennett & Seger-
berg, 2012). We applied a communicative network approach to online debates by, ﬁrst,
exploring the socio-semantic networks of actors addressing tagged topics or hashtags
and other actors to identify the scope of counter-public debates. Second, we analyzed
retweet networks as additional intensiﬁcation patterns within the debates.
Focusing on the main platform-speciﬁc functions reveals how hashtag activism in inter-
action with other aﬀordances (Albu & Etter, 2016) contributes to the conﬁguration of
counterpublics. In particular, re-tweeting intensiﬁes debates through increasing the pro-
minence of certain hashtags and usernames. The tweets sent by the initiating environ-
mental organization WakkerDier were re-tweeted most often and mainly by individual
citizens, resulting in greater resonance for the organization and its messages. Thus, civil
society organizations were important as leaders of the social countermarketing campaigns
studied here while citizens contributed to further intensifying the scope of the campaigns.
Our ﬁndings thus, particularly, emphasize the importance of digital citizen participation
(Barisione et al., 2019) for the propagation of counter-public debates. Independent of
their focus on consumer aspects (kilo stunner) or meat production (over-fed chicken), citi-
zens intensiﬁed the scope of the debates on three diﬀerent levels: First, concerning the size
in terms of frequency of tweets and retweets. Second, in terms of meaning creation because
citizens used the greatest diversity of hashtags. And third, with respect to their ability of
involving the highest diversity of other actors by mentioning usernames in their tweets. As
a more general implication, this ﬁnding conﬁrms that social production and mutual con-
stitutions are fundamental for the formation of digital counterpublics (Choi & Cho, 2017).
In other words, digital counterpublics initiated by civil society organizations are more
likely to succeed if they can mobilize a broader social movement via connective action
(Bennett & Segerberg, 2012). Consequently, the potential of a hashtag to mobilize citizens,
in particular, deserves explicit evaluation for eﬀective hashtag activism. Central campaign
hashtags that are normatively and emotionally loaded and yet suﬃciently open to allow
diﬀerent diagnostic and prognostic interpretations may thereby facilitate mobilization
(Stevens et al., 2019).
INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION & SOCIETY
1707


We focused on co-addressed hashtags as representation of the topics and usernames as
representation of the actors and visualized the networks with automated software routines.
This perspective provides an overview of the interplay between actors, addressed ‘actants’,
and topics in a debate (Hellsten & Leydesdorﬀ, 2020), for example, in the cases studied
here showing the targeted supermarkets or restaurants in relation to negatively loaded
and potentially mobilizing topics, such as animal suﬀering and boycott. Combining
data about the involvement of actors, hashtags, usernames, and retweeting behavior can
thereby overcome the necessity to determine the ‘boundaries’ of counterpublics in
terms of content and involved actors. Boundaries are, instead, co-deﬁned by the various
actors in a bottom-up way. Our results show that media actors formed their own cluster
in terms of co-occurring hashtags and addressed actors. In contrast, citizens and environ-
mental organizations formed counterpublic clusters in both debates. The focus on hash-
tags as bridging between actors and clusters of actors emphasizes the shift from
collective to connective action (Bennett & Segerberg, 2012). While this study has identiﬁed
counterpublics based on clusters that emerged via connective activities, a closer look at the
meaning that is conveyed with these activities would be a next step to better understand
ﬂexible or dynamic boundaries of counterpublics.
Moreover, digital counterpublics were found to inﬂuence action and success of counter-
publics across platforms (e.g., Jackson & Foucault Welles, 2015). For both campaigns,
peaks were detected when related issues were debated on the level of national or European
politics. This conﬁrms how the success of digital counterpublics can be inﬂuenced by
oﬄine events and, particularly, be aﬀected by political agendas – pointing to a similar
mechanism that has been found for the relation between counterpublics and newspaper
coverage (Oliver & Maney, 2000). Integrating data from online and oﬄine sources can
provide a more integrated overview of how technologically guided connective action
translates into oﬄine collective action. For instance, is the intensifying role of citizens
restricted to online spaces or is there a spillover to oﬄine action? Or to what extent do
central hashtags, which may also be considered as framing devices, expand to oﬄine col-
lective action frames?
As typical for research based on social media data, the selection criteria in addition to
restricted access present possible limitations with respect to the representative character of
the data. However, because of the nature of the two debates that have evolved around
social countermarketing campaigns, the campaign hashtags can be considered as central
organizing elements of the online debates. Selecting appropriate search terms may, how-
ever, present a challenge for less clearly deﬁned issues. In addition, we do not expect any
systematic omission patterns inherent in the archiving routines of the software we have
used.
For analytic as well as pragmatic purposes, authoring actors were grouped into eight
actor categories. While this allows to discern communicative tendencies between these
actor groups, other aspects of hypertextuality, such as the degree of correspondence
between active and passive actors, remain hidden. Also, emotional aspects and potentially
related degree of opinion diversity could be further explored in this context (see Barisione
et al., 2019; Jackson & Foucault Welles, 2016). While we follow previous research in inter-
preting hashtags as frames (Papacharissi & de Fatima Oliveira, 2012; Stevens et al., 2019),
for a more comprehensive socio-semantic network approach also other aspects of
1708
A. WONNEBERGER ET AL.


meaning creation, such as the degree of support or contestation of issue-speciﬁc frames
(Lycarião & dos Santos, 2017), could be included.
The current study has accounted for dynamics of online activism by, ﬁrst, tracking
actor involvement in online debates over time and, second, including Twitter-speciﬁc
elements reﬂecting the dynamics of a network, such as hashtags and retweets. Nonetheless,
we believe that further theorizing is needed to understand the temporal development of
patterns of co-relations between authors, addressed actors, and the tagged sub-topics in
online debates. In addition to tracing formations of counterpublics, this approach allows
to discern and position counterpublics within the broader context of issue-speciﬁc debates
online or, in other words, observe the interdependencies between counter- and dominant
publics in terms of communicative ﬂows (see, Downey & Fenton, 2003). This results in a
diﬀerent look at the fragmentation problem of counterpublics, that is, answering to what
extent they form exclusive echo-chambers or are connected to the wider public debate
(Papacharissi, 2002; Schäfer, 2015).
Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Notes on contributors
Anke Wonneberger is an assistant professor in Corporate Communication at the Amsterdam
School of Communication Research (ASCoR), University of Amsterdam. Her research topics
include strategic communication of non-proﬁt organizations, environmental communication,
and audience measurement. [email: a.wonneberger@uva.nl]
Iina Hellsten is an associate professor in Corporate Communication at the Amsterdam School of
Communication Research (ASCoR), University of Amsterdam. She has expertise in network
approach to communication sciences, social avalanches, and automated methods for semantic
analysis. [email: i.r.hellsten@uva.nl]
Sandra Jacobs is an assistant professor in Corporate Communication at the Amsterdam School of
Communication Research (ASCoR), University of Amsterdam. In her research, she focuses on stra-
tegic communication of public sector organizations, mediatization, and the construction of public
debates. [email: s.h.j.jacobs@uva.nl]
ORCID
Anke Wonneberger
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2209-9983
Iina R. Hellsten
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7194-360X
Sandra H. J. Jacobs
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7547-1339
References
Albu, O. B., & Etter, M. (2016). Hypertextuality and social media a study of the constitutive and
paradoxical
implications
of
organizational
Twitter
use.
Management
Communication
Quarterly, 30(1), 5–31.
Barisione, M., Micailidou, A., & Airoldi, M. (2019). Understanding a digital movement op opinion:
The case of #RefugeesWelcome. Information, Communication & Society, 22(8), 1145–1164.
Bellew, W., Bauman, A., Freeman, B., & Kite, J. (2017). Social countermarketing: Brave new world,
brave new map. Journal of Social Marketing, 7(2), 205–222.
INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION & SOCIETY
1709


Bennett, L. (2012). Grounding the European public sphere: Looking beyond the mass media to digi-
tally mediated issue publics. KFG Working Paper Series, 43. Retrieved from http://nbn-resolving.
de/urn:nbn:de:0168-ssoar-373517
Bennett, W. L., & Segerberg, A. (2012). The logic of connective action: Digital media and the
personalization of contentious politics. Information, Communication & Society, 15(5), 739–
768.
Chen, W., Tu, F., & Zheng, P. (2017). A transnational networked public sphere of air pollution:
Analysis of a Twitter network of PM2.5 from the risk society perspective. Information,
Communication & Society, 20(7), 1005–1023.
Choi, S. Y., & Cho, Y. (2017). Generating counter-public spheres through social media: Two social
movements in neoliberalised South Korea. Javnost, 24(1), 15–33.
De Nooy, W., Mrvar, A., & Batagelj, V. (2011). Exploratory social network analysis with Pajek:
Revised and expanded second edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Downey, J., & Fenton, N. (2003). New media, counter publicity and the public sphere. New Media
and Society, 5(2), 185–202.
Evans, S. K., Pearce, K. E., Vitak, J., & Treem, J. W. (2017). Explicating aﬀordances: A conceptual
framework for understanding aﬀordances in communication research. Journal of Computer-
Mediated Communication, 22(1), 35–52.
Ferree, M. M., Gamson, W. A., Gerhards, J., & Rucht, D. (2002). Four models of the public sphere in
modern democracies. Theory and Society, 31, 289–324.
Fraser, N. (1990). Rethinking the public sphere: A contribution to the critique of actually existing
democracy. Social Text, 25/26, 56–80.
Habermas, J. (1996). Between facts and norms: Contributions to a discourse theory of law and
democracy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hellsten, I., Jacobs, S., & Wonneberger, A. (2019). Active and passive stakeholders in issue arenas: A
communication network approach to the bird ﬂu debate on Twitter. Public Relations Review, 45
(1), 35–48.
Hellsten, I., & Leydesdorﬀ, L. (2020). Automated analysis of actor–topic networks on Twitter: New
approaches to the analysis of socio-semantic networks. Journal of the Association for Information
Science and Technology, 71(1), 3–15.
Jackson, S. J., & Foucault Welles, B. (2015). Hijacking #myNYPD: Social media dissent and net-
worked counterpublics. Journal of Communication, 65(6), 932–952.
Jackson, S. J., & Foucault Welles, B. (2016). #Ferguson is everywhere: Initiators in emerging coun-
terpublic networks. Information, Communication & Society, 19(3), 397–418.
Kaiser, J. (2017). Public spheres of skepticism: Climate skeptics’ online comments in the German
networked public sphere. International Journal of Communication, 11, 1661–1682.
Kamada, T., & Kawai, S. (1989). An algorithm for drawing general undirected graphs. Information
Processing Letters, 31(1), 7–15.
Leydesdorﬀ, L., & Hellsten, I. (2006). Measuring the meaning of words in contexts: An automated
analysis of controversies about ‘Monarch butterﬂies, ‘Frankenfoods,’ and ‘stem cells’.
Scientometrics, 67(2), 231–258.
Lycarião, D., & dos Santos, M. A. (2017). Bridging semantic and social network analyses: The case
of the hashtag #precisamosfalarsobreaborto (we need to talk about abortion) on Twitter.
Information, Communication & Society, 20(3), 368–385.
Milioni, D. L. (2009). Probing the online counterpublic sphere: The case of Indymedia Athens.
Media, Culture and Society, 31(3), 409–431.
Milliken, M., Gibson, K., & O’Donnell, S. (2008). User-generated video and the online public
sphere: Will YouTube facilitate digital freedom of expression in Atlantic Canada? American
Communication Journal, 10(3), 1–14.
Newman, M. E. J. (2004). Fast algorithm for detecting community structure in networks. Physical
Review E, 69, 1–5. 066133.
Noack, A. (2007). Energy models for graph clustering. Journal of Graph Algorithms and
Applications, 11(2), 453–480.
1710
A. WONNEBERGER ET AL.


Ogan, C., & Varol, O. (2017). What is gained and what is left to be done when content analysis is
added to network analysis in the study of a social movement: Twitter use during Gezi Park.
Information, Communication & Society, 20(8), 1220–1238.
Oliver, P. E., & Maney, G. M. (2000). Political processes and local newspaper coverage of protest
events: From selection bias to triadic interactions. American Journal of Sociology, 106(2),
463–505.
Papacharissi, Z. (2002). The virtual sphere: The internet as a public sphere. New Media & Society, 4
(1), 9–27.
Papacharissi, Z., & de Fatima Oliveira, M. (2012). Aﬀective news and networked publics: The
rhythms of news storytelling on #Egypt. Journal of Communication, 62(2), 266–282.
Piela, A. (2017). How do Muslim women who wear the niqab interact with others online? A case
study of a proﬁle on a photo-sharing website. New Media & Society, 19(1), 67–80.
Riegert, K., & Ramsay, G. (2013). Activists, individualists, and comics: The counter-publicness of
Lebanese blogs. Television and New Media, 14(4), 286–303.
Schäfer, M. S. (2015). Digital public sphere. In G. Mazzoleni (Ed.), The international Encyclopedia
of political communication (pp. 322–328). London: Wiley Blackwell.
Stevens, T. M., Aarts, N., & Dewulf, A. (2019). The emergence and evolution of master terms in the
public debate about livestock farming: Semantic ﬁelds, communication strategies and policy
practices. Discourse, Context & Media, 31, 1–11. 100317.
Stevens, T. M., Aarts, N., Termeer, C. J. A. M., & Dewulf, A. (2018). Social media hypes about agro-
food issues: Activism, scandals and conﬂicts. Food Policy, 79, 23–34.
Thelwall, M. (2009). Introduction to webometrics: Quantitative web research for the social sciences.
Synthesis lectures on information concepts, retrieval, and services. San Rafael, CA: Morgan &
Claypool.
Theocharis, Y., Lowe, W., Van Deth, J. W., & García-Albacete, G. (2015). Using Twitter to mobilize
protest action: Online mobilization patterns and action repertoires in the Occupy Wall Street,
Indignados, and Aganaktismenoi movements. Information, Communication & Society, 18(2),
202–220.
Toepﬂ, F., & Piwoni, E. (2015). Public spheres in interaction: Comment sections of news websites as
counterpublic spaces. Journal of Communication, 65(3), 465–488.
Tombleson, B., & Wolf, K. (2017). Rethinking the circuit of culture: How participatory culture has
transformed cross-cultural communication. Public Relations Review, 43(1), 14–25.
Tremayne, M. (2014). Anatomy of protest in the digital era: A network analysis of Twitter and
Occupy Wall Street. Social Movement Studies, 13(1), 110–126.
Van Eck, N. J., & Waltman, L. (2011). Text mining and visualization using VOSviewer. ISSI
Newsletter, 7(3), 50–54.
Wakker Dier. (2017a). Plofkipcampagne [Over-fed chicken campaign]. Retrieved from https://www.
wakkerdier.nl/campagnes/plofkip/
Wakker Dier. (2017b). Wat is een kiloknaller? [What is a kilo stunner?]. Retrieved from https://
www.wakkerdier.nl/campagnes/kiloknaller/kiloknallermeting/
Wimmer, J. (2005). Counter-public spheres and the revival of the European public sphere. Javnost,
12(2), 93–110.
Xiong, Y., Cho, M., & Boatwright, B. (2019). Hashtag activism and message frames among social
movement organizations: Semantic network analysis and thematic analysis of Twitter during
the #MeToo movement. Public Relations Review, 45(1), 10–23.
Yang, G. (2016). Narrative agency in hashtag activism: The case of #BlackLivesMatter. Media and
Communication, 4(4), 13–17.
INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION & SOCIETY
1711
