Shifting Climates: Climate Change Communication from
YouTube to TikTok
Arianna Pera
arpe@itu.dk
IT University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, Denmark
Luca Maria Aiello
luai@itu.dk
IT University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, Denmark
ABSTRACT
Public discourse on critical issues such as climate change is progres-
sively shifting to social media platforms that prioritize short-form
video content. Content creators acting on those platforms play a
pivotal role in shaping the discourse, yet the dynamics of commu-
nication and audience reactions across platforms remain underex-
plored. To improve our understanding of this transition, we studied
the video content produced by 21 prominent YouTube creators who
have expanded their influence to TikTok as information dissemina-
tors. Using dictionary-based tools and BERT-based embeddings, we
analyzed the transcripts of nearly 7k climate-related videos across
both platforms and the 574k comments they received. We found
that, when publishing on TikTok, creators use a more emotionally
resonant, self-referential, and action-oriented language compared
to YouTube. We also observed a strong semantic alignment between
videos and comments, with creators who excel at diversifying their
TikTok content from YouTube typically receiving responses that
more closely align with their produced content. This suggests that
tailored communication strategies hold greater promise in directing
public discussion towards desired topics, which bears implications
for the design of effective climate communication campaigns.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems →Social networks.
KEYWORDS
TikTok, YouTube, climate change, content creator, social media,
climate communication
1
INTRODUCTION
Social media platforms have reshaped the landscape of public dis-
course, facilitating unprecedented global connectivity and empow-
ering individuals to participate in critical societal debates, such
as those surrounding climate change [18]. The study of online so-
cial discourse is crucial for understanding interaction dynamics
that may either impede or enhance processes of opinion forma-
tion [14], democratic deliberation [9], and collective action [27].
Most prior studies in this area often have focused on traditional mi-
croblogging platforms such as Twitter or Reddit [19], overlooking
the continuous shifts of online audiences to new digital spaces [11],
with younger crowds increasingly leaning towards platforms that
emphasize video content, particularly in short form [25].
Video-sharing platforms like YouTube and TikTok have emerged
as powerful tools for disseminating information, shaping percep-
tions, and mobilizing communities [8, 26]. The dynamics on these
platforms are largely driven by content creators, who play a criti-
cal role as both disseminators of information and opinion leaders
and are fundamental actors in shaping a collective discourse on
climate that can break out from escalating levels of polarization [6].
Nevertheless, the characteristics of climate communication on mod-
ern video-sharing platforms remain underexplored. In particular,
one key open question is how content creators tailor their com-
munication strategies to accommodate the substantial differences
in content format and audience composition across different plat-
forms [7], and how the public’s response correlates to these changes.
Enhancing our understanding of the interplay between storytelling
and public reactions would provide valuable insights for refining
strategies for climate communication online.
To improve our understanding of climate communication on
video platforms, we conducted a comparative study of the YouTube
and TikTok video productions of 21 prominent climate commu-
nicators active on both platforms. Crucially, by investigating the
differences between the climate narratives of each creator across
platforms, we contribute to the characterization of content adap-
tation strategies adopted by professional communicators, rather
than merely describing the differences in climate-related content
between YouTube and TikTok. To accomplish this, we use a text-
analysis toolkit applied to video transcripts, descriptions, and user
comments. We address two research questions:
RQ1. What are the differences in the style and content of climate
change communication between YouTube and Tiktok? Drawing from
previous qualitative literature, we focused on markers of emotions,
individualism, and time focus, which are suggested to be typical
elements of TikTok’s style of interaction [3, 8, 25].
RQ2. Does the audience reaction semantically align with the refer-
ence content? On video-sharing platforms, public discussions are
centered around video content, giving content creators some con-
trol over the topics that receive public attention. We measured the
semantic closeness between videos and their comments to quantify
how much the creators’ selection of topics defines the nature of the
collective discourse on these platforms. Specifically, we investigated
whether comments are semantically consistent with their corre-
sponding videos (RQ2.1) and whether larger semantic shifts in a
creator’s content across platforms correlate with a greater semantic
alignment of the public’s reaction (RQ2.2).
We found that TikTok narratives contain more calls to action,
are more emotionally charged, and have a greater focus on the self
rather than addressing others, compared to YouTube. Comments
closely reflect video narratives in terms of semantics, and creators
excelling at diversifying their TikTok content from YouTube tend
to receive reactions that align more closely with their produced
content. These insights can guide the design of future climate com-
munication campaigns and inform quantitative studies on online
discourse on video-sharing platforms.
arXiv:2312.04974v2  [cs.CY]  20 Feb 2024


Pera et al.
Table 1: Content creators and their audience size.
Type
Creators
tot. views
Institutions
UN climate change, MET office
TT: 39,6M
YT: 5,5M
News outlets
BBC news, The Guardian, DW Planet A.
Now this Earth
TT: 24,6M
YT: 222,5M
Science
communicators
Climate Adam, Dr Gilbz, Our Changing Climate,
TED, Minute Earth, Zahra Biabani, Pique Action,
Margreen
TT: 8,7M
YT: 76,7M
Activists
Extinction Rebellion, Greenpeace, Just Stop Oil,
Rupert Read, Friends of the Earth, Action for the
Climate, Parley
TT: 39,3M
YT: 83,2M
2
METHODOLOGY
2.1
Data collection
We study content creators within four main categories of climate
change communicators that have been researched consistently
across prior studies in communication and environmental psychol-
ogy: institutions (including governments, NGOs, and politicians),
news outlets, science communicators, and activists (e.g, community-
based movements and opinion leaders) [15, 22]. Our decision to
focus on creators rather than general climate change content is
driven by our aim to characterize content adaptation strategies of
users active on different platforms.
We began by identifying TikTok (TT) creators through a manual
examination of the most popular accounts obtained via querying
its Research API for “climate change” videos, analyzing the top
100 results returned. From each profile we deemed relevant to our
scope, we also parsed the list of followed accounts, selecting those
associated with climate change content. The full list was then man-
ually categorized into the four communicator types and matched
with the respective YouTube (YT) accounts based on usernames.
The resulting set included 27 creators active on both platforms, later
refined to 21 accounts who posted a minimum of three videos on
each platform (Table 1). To isolate climate-related content from the
video production of creators who cover diverse topics, we curated
a list of keywords. To ensure both precision and high coverage,
we started from a seed keyword and performed a keyword expan-
sion step. We initiated this process on TT, sampling 100 videos per
month matching the keyword “climate change” from September
2016 to November 2023. From the most frequently used hashtags
in the retrieved videos, we identified 20 climate-related keywords1.
We then used this list to query the TT Research API and the YT API.
In total, we collected 2,617 TT videos and 4,286 YT videos. Table 1
reports an overview of the audience of climate change communica-
tion by creator type. The total number of views is 112,2M on TT and
387,8M on YT. We highlight that both regular videos and YT’s shorts
are included in the YT set; currently, it is not feasible to directly
filter for shorts through the YouTube API. Thus, the distribution of
YT video lengths is varied, as shown in Table 2.
For the analysis of video content, we relied on two data sources:
transcripts and video descriptions. Transcripts were available for a
subset of auto-captioned videos on both platforms. On YT, when
1climate change, global warming, savetheplanet, climate crisis, greennewdeal, renew-
able energy, climateaction, gogreen, climatejustice, climatechange, globalwarming,
climate_change, savetheworld, climatecrisis, forclimate, savetheearth, stopclimate-
change, renewableenergy, climatechangeisreal, saveourplanet
Table 2: Quantiles of YT video duration.
quantile
𝑞25
𝑞50
𝑞75
𝑞90
length
0m58s
3m36s
10m15s
26m57s
Table 3: Quantiles of comments descriptive variables.
platform
q25
q50
q75
q90
comments
per video
TT
3
9
29
100
YT
2
15
81
383
tokens per
comment
TT
1
7
15
23
YT
7
15
32
64
auto-captions were not available, we employed the Whisper audio-
to-text converter to retrieve missing transcripts [20]. However, this
conversion could not be applied to TT videos without infringing the
Terms of Service. In instances where transcripts were unavailable
(7.7% of YT videos and 79.8% of TT videos), we used video descrip-
tions as an alternative. Given the high cosine similarity between
Sentence-BERT [21] embedding representations of transcripts and
descriptions in videos that contain both (0.471 on TT and 0.463 on
YT), we deemed descriptions as suitable proxies for the video con-
tent. For simplicity, throughout the paper, we use the term transcript
to refer to any textual description of a video.
We conducted minimal pre-processing on the textual data, ex-
cluding transcripts with fewer than five unique words and removing
text within music tags indicating musical pieces within a YT tran-
script. Descriptions underwent cleaning, including the removal of
website links, mentions, hashtags, references to other platforms,
and recurring expressions, such as account descriptions.
To study the reaction to climate change communication, we
retrieved comments to creators’ videos. In particular, we called
the CommentThreads method in the YT API to collect up to 200
comments and first-level replies in YT and the VideoComments
method in the TT API to collect up to 100 comments and nested
replies. We collected a total of 81,750 comments for TT and 492,788
comments for YT. Table 3 reports the quantiles for the number of
comments per video and the number of tokens per comment, for
TT and YT.
2.2
Metrics
Popularity. We quantify the popularity of content creators on
TT relative to YT with the ratio between the average number of
views per video published on the two platforms:
relative popularity(u) =
𝑎𝑣𝑔(views𝑢
𝑇𝑇)
𝑎𝑣𝑔(views𝑢
𝑌𝑇)
(1)
Values considerably deviating from 1 indicate a creator being more
popular on TT (≫1) or YT (≪1).
Language metrics. We employed established linguistic tools
to conduct video transcript analysis. The NRC lexicon [13] gauged
the proportion of words expressing emotions (anger, disgust, fear,
joy, sadness, and surprise). The LIWC psycho-linguistic dictionary
identified the fraction of words related to sentiment (positive or
negative), temporal focus (present, past, or future), and personal
pronouns usage. We computed an emotionality measure as the mean
relative frequency of emotional words and a sentiment measure


Shifting Climates: Climate Change Communication from YouTube to TikTok
video2
video1
video3
videos
videos
creator1
creator1
creator2
videos
videos
platform-shift
platform-shift
Video-comment alignment
Platform-shift vs. creator-audience alignment
comments
comments
creator-audience alignment
creator-audience alignment
comments1
RQ2.1
RQ2.2
on a given platform
YouTube
TikTok
either
or
Figure 1: Alignment of comments to corresponding videos
(RQ2.1) and overall content-reaction alignment related to
platform stylistic shift (RQ2.2).
as the difference between positive and negative word frequencies.
Considering the important role of personal pronouns in capturing
personal identity from text [17], we derived an individualism index
from pronoun fractions:
individualism = 0.5 +
0.5 · (f I −f we −f you −f he|she|they)
f I + f we + f you + f he|she|they + 1
(2)
where f• denotes the relative frequency of a pronoun group in the
text. Values around 0.5 suggest a balance between the use of first-
person pronouns and other personal pronouns, while values closer
to 0 or 1 indicate a focus on the community or the self, respectively.
This measurement represents a best-effort approach to establish a
unified metric that can capture the equilibrium between self-focus
and attention to consideration of others. Yet, we acknowledge that
the use of one single score may offer an oversimplified perspective
on the nuanced relationship between identity and pronouns.
Semantic alignment. We used Sentence-BERT [21] to convert
text into embeddings for semantic comparison, considering three
similarity measures to assess the alignment of video-comment pairs
and across video corpora on different platforms. For a video 𝑣𝑖
posted by a creator 𝑢and its 𝑛comments 𝐶𝑖= 𝑐𝑖1,𝑐𝑖2, ...,𝑐𝑖𝑛, let
v𝑖represent the Sentence-BERT embeddings vector of the video
transcript and C𝑖represent the average embedding vector of all
its comments. We quantified the similarity between the two by
computing the difference between the video-comment similarity
and the average similarity that the comment vector has with each
of the other video vectors from the same creator, given a total of 𝑚
posted videos:
video-comment alignment(𝑣𝑖) = 𝑐𝑜𝑠(C𝑖, v𝑖) −
Í𝑚
𝑗=1,𝑗≠𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑠(C𝑖, v𝑗)
(𝑚−1)
(3)
Values exceeding 0 indicate comments being semantically closer to
the video they reference than to the content of other videos from
the same creator. We used this measure to characterize creators by
averaging it over all the videos they posted on either platform.
To determine how closely a creator 𝑢’s narrative aligns with
their audience’s reaction, we calculated the similarity between the
average embedding of the videos they posted (V𝑢) and the average
Figure 2: Popularity of creators on YT and TT.
embedding of the comments that all their videos received (C𝑢):
creator-audience alignment = 𝑐𝑜𝑠(V𝑢, C𝑢)
(4)
Finally, to assess the semantic shift between a creator’s YT and
TT productions, we calculated the cosine similarity between the
average embeddings of videos on the two platforms:
platform-shift = 𝑐𝑜𝑠(V𝑢
𝑌𝑇, V𝑢
𝑇𝑇)
(5)
These three measurements enabled us to test whether the audi-
ence discourse significantly aligns with the narrative of the corre-
sponding video content (RQ2.1, Eq. 3), and whether the magnitude
of semantic shifts in a creator’s narration, particularly between
one platform and another (Eq. 5), is associated with the degree of
alignment between such overall narrative and the public’s reaction
(RQ2.2, Eq. 4). This concept is illustrated in Figure 1.
3
RESULTS
3.1
Types of climate change communication
All climate change communicators in our study, with the sole ex-
ception of Margreen, started using YT as a platform for content
dissemination before transitioning to TT — on average, 5.8 years
before their TT debut. Creators exhibit varying degrees of popular-
ity, with some enjoying greater favor on TT (e.g., unclimatechange,
metoffices), others finding more success on YT (e.g., ourchangingcli-
mate), and a few achieving a balance between the two platforms,
as illustrated in Figure 2.
To assess the diversity of communication between YT and TT,
we started by analyzing linguistic cues used in videos (Figure 3).
TT videos reference emotions more frequently and offer more
self-focused narratives than those on YT. This aligns with qual-
itative studies on TT, which emphasize the prevalence of self-
reflexivity and self-representation, particularly among younger
contributors [8, 25], and the frequent use of highly emotional lan-
guage [3]. Narratives on YT, on the other hand, tend to reference
past or future events more frequently compared to TT. These lin-
guistic styles are generally consistent across all types of content
creators, with a few notable exceptions. For instance, science com-
municators and activists typically express more positive sentiment
on TT than on YT, while institutions and news outlets tend to con-
vey more negative sentiments. The difference between the style
used in YT and TT is less predictable for science communicators


Pera et al.
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Ratio of Emotionality TT/YT
0
2
4
6
Ratio of Sentiment TT/YT
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Ratio of Individualism TT/YT
Instit.
News
Science
comm.
Activists
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Ratio of Past focus TT/YT
Instit.
News
Science
comm.
Activists
0.6
0.8
1.0
Ratio of Present focus TT/YT
Instit.
News
Science
comm.
Activists
0
1
2
3
Ratio of Future focus TT/YT
Figure 3: Distributions of ratios between linguistic features
found in the TT and YT videos of each creator, grouped by
creator category.
Table 4: Examples of content by topic.
Topic
Content example
Call-to
action
YT
...Let’s get Ohio leaders to pass the Energy Jobs and Justice Act now...
TT
Join us in demanding your governor declare a climate emergency...
COPs
YT
The UN Climate Change Conference (COP 26) in Glasgow, United Kingdom...
TT
The UN Climate Conference COP 27 in Egypt started today...
Protests
YT
...welcome to Sunday’s weekly roundup with this rebellion...
TT
I’m here in the road today because things are desperate...
Recycle
YT
Plastics have been in production for less than a hundred years...
TT
Reminder: plastic doesn’t break down it breaks up!
Energy
YT
These men are some of the biggest polluters on the planet...
TT
How can the UK secure affordable energy for everyone?...
Diet
YT
We really looked at companies that were adopting plant-based...
TT
Did you know that pig production in just the top 4 factory farming...
Disasters
YT
...workers who keep flights running during a winter storm...
TT
It’s been freaking hot this week we’ve actually just had some of the hottest...
Oceans
YT
Underneath the rocking blues of the ocean’s surface lie forests of green...
TT
More than 600 tons of dead marine washed ashore in Florida due to red tide.
compared to other categories across all linguistic measures, sug-
gesting a wide range of communication styles within this category.
To determine whether the differences in linguistic tone across
the two platforms can be attributed to differing topical focuses,
we mapped all embedding vectors of video transcripts from the
two platforms onto a 2-dimensional projection using UMAP [12].
Subsequently, we applied HDBSCAN [5] to the stacked UMAP em-
beddings of YT and TT content, resulting in the identification of 37
clusters. To enhance clarity, we merged smaller clusters that were
closely situated within the same density region. This consolidation
yielded a topical map of 8 distinctive clusters, as depicted in Figure 4.
Upon inspecting a random selection of 20 transcripts from each
cluster, we found they represent distinct topics (Table 4): protest
reports, petition signing and group joining campaigns, plant-based
diet and environmental protection, oceans at risk, natural disasters,
energy and emissions, recycling, and Conferences Of the Parties
(COPs). Notably, TT content exhibited a pronounced concentration
on topics related to calls to action. This observation aligns with
the interactive practices attributed to TT, as highlighted in social
science studies [1], and with the psychological impact of communi-
cating emotions on decision-making processes [2], emphasizing an
association between emotionality and call-to-action events on TT.
call-to-action
recycle
energy
COPs
disasters
oceans
diets
protests
Figure 4: UMAP representation of YT and TT content, with
annotated topics.
3.2
Semantic shift and comment alignment
To evaluate the alignment between content and reactions, we first
assessed whether the narratives chosen by creators have an im-
pact on the nature of the collective discourse that emerges from
users commenting on their videos. We estimated the degree of se-
mantic alignment between videos and their respective comment
threads using the video-comment alignment measure (Eq. 3). Across
all creators and both platforms, comments generally align with the
semantics of the videos they reference (Figure 5a), especially among
science communicators and news outlets. Specifically, we observed
that video-comment alignment tends to be higher on YouTube, with
values ranging from 0.019 to 0.385, compared to TikTok, where
values range from 0.020 to 0.149. To explore the potential con-
founding effect introduced by platform choice, we computed the
cosine similarity between a randomly selected set of 100 videos
and their corresponding comment centroids for both YouTube and
TikTok. The confidence interval of the average of this similarity
measure is 0.349 ± 0.016 for YouTube and 0.246 ± 0.036 for Tik-
Tok. As a result, while comments typically demonstrate a stronger
alignment with videos on YouTube in contrast to TikTok, such
alignment is even stronger for the YouTube videos considered in
this study. This finding quantifies creators’ influence not only in
reaching broad audiences but also in guiding online discussions to-
wards specific themes. While our study is purely observational and
doesn’t conclusively establish a causal link between video content
and public reaction, the content-centric nature of video-sharing
platforms grants creators some control over emerging topics in
public discourse.
Lastly, we investigated whether a greater degree of content adap-
tation to the platform is associated with a stronger semantic align-
ment between video and comments. In our specific context, most
content creators began their careers on YT, and the degree to which
they adapt their TT content to appeal to a new audience may cor-
relate with how closely the audience can relate to that content.
We found an inverse correlation (Pearson 𝑟= −0.569, 𝑝< 0.01)
between the creators’ platform-shift (i.e., the semantic similarity


Shifting Climates: Climate Change Communication from YouTube to TikTok
(a) Video-content alignment for YT and TT.
(b) Platform-shift vs. creator-audience alignment on TT.
Figure 5: Semantic conformity in terms of alignment of comments to their reference content (a) and alignment of TT audience
to TT creators given the diversity of content from YT (b). Boxplots show distributions of the values along the two axes.
between their YT and TT content) and their creator-audience align-
ment on TT (i.e., the semantic similarity between videos and com-
ments on TT, defined in Eq. 4). This suggests that creators who
diversify their content the most when transitioning from YT to
TT also receive TT reactions that most closely align with their
proposed narrative.
4
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Climate change stands out as one of the key social dilemmas of
our century. Video-sharing platforms like YouTube and TikTok
offer ideal avenues for dynamic communication on this pressing
topic. TikTok, in particular, has established itself as an exceptionally
dynamic platform, emphasizing the preference for concise commu-
nication. Content creators transitioning from YouTube to TikTok
might then need to recalibrate their strategies to align with the
unique dynamics of this platform.
Our analysis of the video content of 21 climate change communi-
cators active on both YouTube and TikTok uncovered some of these
adaptation mechanisms. When transitioning to TikTok, seasoned
YouTube creators tend to adopt more emotional and self-centered
narratives when addressing climate change, with the predominant
topic being calls to action (RQ1). The reactions to climate change
narratives are generally aligned with the corresponding content, es-
pecially among science communicators and news outlets (RQ2.1).
Notably, creators excelling in diversifying TikTok content from
YouTube also tend to receive reactions that align more closely with
their content, which provides initial evidence of the potential of
some creators to steer the public discussion towards desired topics
(RQ2.2). Our findings highlight implications for analysts and inter-
ventions, emphasizing the need to recognize platform distinctions
in content diversity and the importance of tailoring content for
aligned audience reactions.
While we aimed to conduct a fair comparison between YouTube
and TikTok by controlling for the content creator, there are evi-
dently other confounding factors that could account for some of the
differences we found in this study, for instance user demographics
or patterns of content discovery that are different across the two
platforms.
In future work, we aim to expand and diversify our creator sam-
ple, map prevalent climate change discourse narratives on video-
sharing platforms, and explore their correlation with audience re-
actions, with a focus on fostering commitment to action.
5
RELATED WORK
In the realm of YouTube’s climate change communication, there
is a line of research examining the interplay between content and
reactions to assess the effectiveness of communication strategies. In
such a context, Uldam and Askanius [26] explored YouTube’s role in
shaping communicative spaces for activism, Shapiro and Park [23]
analyzed the generality of reactions to climate change content and
later on emphasized the presence of elite-driven discussions [24],
while Kaul et al. [10] provided insights on the role of influencers
in engaging young audiences. These contributions are primarily
qualitative and often involve the manual coding of videos. In the
case of TikTok, emphasis has been placed mainly on content rather
than reactions. Basch et al. [4] studied the popularity of videos
covering natural disasters, Nguyen [16] used semantic networks
and linguistic features for characterizing climate change videos,
and Hautea et al. [8] presented an analysis of recurring templates in
the video narratives of TikTok climate communication. Compared
to previous literature, our study is the first that performs a cross-
platform analysis between TikTok and YouTube and delves into the
semantic relationship between content and reactions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge the support from the Carlsberg Foundation through
the COCOONS project (CF21-0432)
REFERENCES
[1] Crystal Abidin. 2021. Mapping internet celebrity on TikTok: Exploring attention
economies and visibility labours. Cultural Science Journal 12, 1 (2021), 77–103.


Pera et al.
[2] Chethana Achar, Jane So, Nidhi Agrawal, and Adam Duhachek. 2016. What we
feel and why we buy: the influence of emotions on consumer decision-making.
Current Opinion in Psychology 10 (2016), 166–170.
[3] Kristen Barta and Nazanin Andalibi. 2021. Constructing Authenticity on TikTok:
Social Norms and Social Support on the" Fun" Platform. Proceedings of the ACM
on Human-Computer Interaction 5, CSCW2 (2021), 1–29.
[4] Corey H Basch, Bhavya Yalamanchili, and Joseph Fera. 2022. # Climate change
on TikTok: a content analysis of videos. Journal of community health (2022),
1–5.
[5] Ricardo JGB Campello, Davoud Moulavi, and Jörg Sander. 2013. Density-based
clustering based on hierarchical density estimates. In Pacific-Asia conference on
knowledge discovery and data mining. Springer, 160–172.
[6] Max Falkenberg, Alessandro Galeazzi, Maddalena Torricelli, Niccolò Di Marco,
Francesca Larosa, Madalina Sas, Amin Mekacher, Warren Pearce, Fabiana Zollo,
Walter Quattrociocchi, et al. 2022. Growing polarization around climate change
on social media. Nature Climate Change 12, 12 (2022), 1114–1121.
[7] Benjamin Guinaudeau, Kevin Munger, and Fabio Votta. 2022. Fifteen seconds of
fame: TikTok and the supply side of social video. Computational Communication
Research 4, 2 (2022), 463–485.
[8] Samantha Hautea, Perry Parks, Bruno Takahashi, and Jing Zeng. 2021. Showing
they care (or don’t): Affective publics and ambivalent climate activism on TikTok.
Social media+ society 7, 2 (2021), 20563051211012344.
[9] Freddie J Jennings, Valeria P Suzuki, and Alexis Hubbard. 2021. Social media and
democracy: Fostering political deliberation and participation. Western Journal of
Communication 85, 2 (2021), 147–167.
[10] Lena Kaul, Philipp Schrögel, and Christian Humm. 2020. Environmental science
communication for a young audience: a case study on the# EarthOvershootDay
campaign on YouTube. Frontiers in communication 5 (2020), 601177.
[11] Lucio La Cava, Luca Maria Aiello, and Andrea Tagarelli. 2023. Drivers of social
influence in the Twitter migration to Mastodon. Scientific Reports 13, 1 (2023).
[12] Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville. 2018. Umap: Uniform man-
ifold approximation and projection for dimension reduction. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.03426 (2018).
[13] Saif M Mohammad and Peter D Turney. 2013. Crowdsourcing a word–emotion
association lexicon. Computational intelligence 29, 3 (2013), 436–465.
[14] Corrado Monti, Luca Maria Aiello, Gianmarco De Francisci Morales, and
Francesco Bonchi. 2022. The language of opinion change on social media under
the lens of communicative action. Scientific Reports 12, 1 (2022), 17920.
[15] Brigitte Nerlich, Nelya Koteyko, and Brian Brown. 2010. Theory and language of
climate change communication. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change
1, 1 (2010), 97–110.
[16] Ha Nguyen. 2023. TikTok as Learning Analytics Data: Framing Climate Change
and Data Practices. In LAK23: 13th International Learning Analytics and Knowledge
Conference. 33–43.
[17] Ariana Orvell, Susan A Gelman, and Ethan Kross. 2022. What “you” and “we”
say about me: How small shifts in language reveal and empower fundamental
shifts in perspective. Social and Personality Psychology Compass 16, 5 (2022),
e12665.
[18] Warren
Pearce,
Sabine
Niederer,
Suay
Melisa
Özkula,
and
Natalia
Sánchez Querubín. 2019.
The social media life of climate change: Plat-
forms, publics, and future imaginaries. Wiley interdisciplinary reviews: Climate
change 10, 2 (2019), e569.
[19] Arianna Pera, Gianmarco de Francisci Morales, and Luca Maria Aiello. 2023.
Measuring Behavior Change with Observational Studies: a Review. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.19951 (2023).
[20] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and
Ilya Sutskever. 2023. Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision.
In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 28492–28518.
[21] Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings
using siamese bert-networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084 (2019).
[22] Mike S Schäfer. 2012. Online communication on climate change and climate
politics: a literature review. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change 3, 6
(2012), 527–543.
[23] Matthew A Shapiro and Han Woo Park. 2015. More than entertainment: YouTube
and public responses to the science of global warming and climate change. Social
Science Information 54, 1 (2015), 115–145.
[24] Matthew A Shapiro and Han Woo Park. 2018. Climate change and YouTube:
Deliberation potential in post-video discussions. Environmental Communication
12, 1 (2018), 115–131.
[25] Catherine Cheng Stahl and Ioana Literat. 2023. # GenZ on TikTok: the collective
online self-portrait of the social media generation. Journal of youth studies 26, 7
(2023), 925–946.
[26] Julie Uldam and Tina Askanius. 2013. Online civic cultures? Debating climate
change activism on YouTube. International Journal of Communication 7 (2013).
[27] Taha Yasseri, Helen Margetts, Peter John, and Scott Hale. 2016. Political turbu-
lence: How social media shape collective action. Princeton University Press.
