 
Selected Papers of #AoIR2022:  
The 23rd Annual Conference of the  
Association of Internet Researchers 
Dublin, Ireland / 2-5 Nov 2022 
 
 
 
Suggested Citation (APA): Ritter, C., Goel, R., & Sharma, R. (2022, November). Decolonizing 
Newsmaking on Youtube: The Case of Climate Journalism During the Cop26 Summit. Paper presented at 
AoIR 2022: The 23rd Annual Conference of the Association of Internet Researchers. Dublin, Ireland: 
AoIR. Retrieved from http://spir.aoir.org. 
DECOLONIZING NEWSMAKING ON YOUTUBE: THE CASE OF 
CLIMATE JOURNALISM DURING THE COP26 SUMMIT  
 
Christian S. Ritter  
Department of Geography, Media and Communication, Karlstad University  
 
Rahul Goel  
Institute of Computer Science, Tartu University  
 
Rajesh Sharma 
Institute of Computer Science, Tartu University  
 
 
The 2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference (COP26) was a mega event of 
climate politics, attracting media coverage from around the world. The summit was a 
central forum for the negotiations of sustainable futures, climate justice and 
decoloniality. Leaders from all parts of the world gathered in Glasgow between October 
31st and November 12th, 2021. The prime goal that the leaders envisioned was to limit 
global warming to 1,5 degrees Celsius in the foreseeable future. While the climate 
summit was extensively covered by numerous TV networks and discussed in a myriad 
of newspapers, the video-sharing platform YouTube served as a further arena where 
debates about the global event were broadcasted. Based on a comprehensive analysis 
of digital data retrieved from YouTube, we raise the following questions: To what extent 
were professional news corporations involved in the coverage of the 2021 Climate 
Change Conference on YouTube? Which actors are given the opportunity to drive the 
meaning of terms and debates associated with the summit COP26 on this platform from 
a central position in their network?  
 
This paper is based on an investigation into the technosocial dynamics of distributing 
news within the platform ecologies of the Anthropocene. Recent climate disasters, such 
as bush fires, flooding and landslides, have been controversially debated on the 
Internet. This study contributes to understandings of the role of YouTube in newsmaking 
and climate change communication. The presented research also informs discussions 
on campaigns of misinformation. We retrieved relational data from the Application 
Programming Interface (API) v3 of YouTube. Using the software NodeXL for the data 


 
collection, the query ‘COP26’ was run. We center our study on network analysis, to 
investigate how the clustering of YouTube channels evolved during the summit COP26. 
The data was used to generate a visualization of a comment network and to create 
network centrality metrics. 
  
The digital traces of activities that users leave on YouTube and other platforms can 
shed light on their platform practices, social relationships, and connectedness within 
online communities. In this investigation, we explore the traces of comments and replies 
to comments, which YouTube users leave under the title and date of a YouTube clip. 
Such comments provide critical insights into how users interact on YouTube. The post-
video discussions can be examined to establish the structure of the network (Shapiro 
and Park, 2018). Gathered with the search query ’COP26’, the data set for this 
investigation contains 17,439 nodes, which represent channels, and 32,172 edges, 
which represent comments. Furthermore, the network entails 70 connected 
communities. Three core metrics of network analysis were created in Gephi to assess 
the popularity of the network nodes: in-degree, out-degree, and PageRank. By 
calculating the in-degree of a YouTube channel, its relative influence can be established 
in terms of comments received for its posted videos. Numerous professional news 
corporations secured a high ranking in the in-degree analysis of the comment network 
of COP26 (see Table 1). The YouTube channels of BBC News, DW News, and Sky 
News received the highest scores. In other words, they are the YouTube accounts who 
attracted the most comments for their videos published during the data collection 
period. Nodes with a high in-degree can be considered hubs within a given network 
(Himelboim et al., 2017). In the out-degree analysis for the researched network, climate 
activists and hobbyist journalists ranked high (see Table 1). The 20 top YouTube 
accounts which were identified through this metric published the most comments within 
the researched network. This outcome also indicates that established news 
corporations were not among the YouTubers who extensively commented on YouTube 
videos since they prioritized the publishing of already aired TV content or launched 
livestreams on the platform to reach out to wider audiences. Finally, the PageRank 
analysis provides a list of the most central actors in this comment network (see Table 
1). The PageRank algorithm is used as a measure for the identification of opinion 
leaders in social network analysis. This type of centrality measures a node’s importance 
or influence in a given network while considering the importance of its neighbors 
(Golbeck, 2013). An analysis of the PageRank scores for the researched comment 
network shows that the YouTube coverage of the mega event was dominated by 
established news corporations, such BBC News, DW News, and Sky News. 
Furthermore, the list of the top five broadcasters for this YouTube comment network 
underlines the global significance of the summit as it includes professional news 
corporations from Britain, Germany, India, and the USA. Crucially, the YouTube 
channels of professional news corporations were in positions of high importance within 
the researched network and can be considered highly influential nodes that exerted 
their authorities within their connected communities. The network graph of the 
researched comment network illustrates how popular YouTube accounts are connected 
with other YouTube users (see Figure 1). Several clusters could be identified within the 
comment network. 


 
 
Figure 1: Graph of the YouTube Comment Network. 


 
 
 
Table 1: Pagerank, In-degree, and Out-degree scores for the 20 top YouTube 
Channels. 
 
The COP26 event epitomizes a transmission of professional TV formats to the 
participatory platform and its infiltration with TV news content. Based on a 
comprehensive analysis of the researched comment network, we argue that 
professional news corporations acted as opinion leaders during the coverage of the 
2021 Climate Summit on YouTube. Journalists combining discourses of climate justice 
with claims for decolonialization found their voice during CPO26. One of their main 
arguments for acknowledging colonial pasts in climate change communication 
emphasizes the longstanding carbon footprints of Western countries. The limitations of 
the investigation into the YouTube coverage of COP26 primarily concern the data 
collection constraints of the platform. The social network data for this investigation 
entailed information on YouTube channels and comments to their videos. Other crucial 
features of the platform, such as metrics about the watch-time of videos and the ‘thumb 
up’ endorsements, were not considered during the data analyses. The theoretical 
implications of this investigation relate to the formation of a diverse, global transmedia 
ecology, within which claims for climate justice are increasingly negotiated. On a 
practical level, this study implies that climate change activism should be tailored for the 
global audiences congregating on digital platforms and its findings are highly beneficial 
for practitioners who engage in political campaigns on digital platforms. Future 
investigations into the negotiations of climate change at mega events can further assess 
the formation of Anthropocene media and climate action on digital platforms. 
Furthermore, we also call for further mixed-method research combining in-depth 
analyzes of situated media practices with digital methods, such as computational 
network analysis and natural language processing techniques. 
 


 
 
References 
 
Himelboim, I., Smith, M., Rainie, L., Shneiderman, B., & Espina, C. (2017). Classifying 
Twitter topic-networks using social network analysis. Social media + society 3(1): 1-13. 
 
Shapiro, M., & Park, H. (2018). Climate change and YouTube: Deliberation potential in 
post-video discussions. Environmental Communication 12(1): 115–131. 
 
Golbeck, J. (2013). Analyzing the social web. Newnes. 
 
 
