256	
Heidi Campana Piva
Guiding interpretation  
towards deproblematization:  
A video interview with a Climate Change  
denier analysed as conspiracy theory
Heidi Campana Piva1
Abstract. Climate Change disinformation is causing lasting damage to both 
sociopolitical spheres and our very own biosphere. The present article identifies 
the meaning-making mechanisms of Climate Change conspiratorial discourse on 
social media by analysing the YouTube video Why I Said Global Warming is the 
Biggest Fraud in History, which had reached more than 758,000 views (May 2023) 
before the channel was deleted (August 2023). A qualitative empirical semiotic 
analysis was carried out focusing on discourse in which Climate Change denial 
is understood as conspiracy theory, that is, a mode of interpretation. The anal-
ysed conspiracy discourse creates identities and shapes social relations in the 
form of dichotomic oppositions/conflicts between those who spread illegitimate 
information (the enemy) and those with access to the truth (a symbolic elite). In 
this context, the fragmentation of science into “real” and “fake” is as dangerous as 
the scientific community’s loss of authority. The analysis of this video shows how 
Climate Change is represented as a fraud and how possible policy responses to it 
are therefore represented as scams. The main effect of such discourse is deprob-
lematization, for it provides people with reasons to reject proposals for actions that 
seek to mitigate the climate crisis.
Keywords: political semiotics; critical discourse analysis; social media; disinforma-
tion; strategic communication; anti-scientific conspiracy theories
Introduction
In essence, Climate Change deniers argue that the well-publicized scientific con-
sensus regarding the human impact on the atmospheric and meteorological condi-
tions of Earth is “manufactured or illusory and that some nefarious force – be it 
the United Nations, liberals, communists, or authoritarians – want to use Climate 
1	
University of Turin, Via S. Ottavio, 20, 10124, Torino, Italy, e-mail: heidicpiva@gmail.com.
https://doi.org/10.12697/SSS.2024.52.1-2.10
Sign Systems Studies 52(1/2), 2024, 256–283


	
Guiding interpretation towards deproblematization	
257
Change as a cover for exerting massive new controls over the populace” (Uscinski 
et al. 2017: 1). Even though more than 97% of publishing climate scientists today 
agree that human activity impacts the planet, “there is a small, politically charged 
portion of the public that actively opposes” this consensus (Sherwin 2021: 556).
What may be one of the most famous cases is that of the economist Bjørn 
Lomborg, who published a book in which he suggests that problems of change 
in climate are undocumented assumptions, and that in every significant measur-
able field, human activity was shown to have only improved environmental and 
developmental conditions (Bergh 2010). Following Lomborg’s rise to fame, climate 
scientists have worked to dispute his claims by reviewing his work in scientific 
journals and showcasing how Lomborg has misinterpreted data and reached dis-
honest results (Bergh 2010). Despite these efforts and the overwhelming scientific 
evidence, others like Lomborg (see Keen 2021 for more examples) have still been 
casting doubt upon what is now a mainstream scientific opinion. This has contrib-
uted to the rise of conspiracy theories which make climate change “a unique case 
in that the scientific agreement has solidified, but public opinion at the same time 
has polarized” (Uscinski et al. 2017: 2).
Largely, Climate Change deniers come in four shapes: those who (1) deny that 
any significant rise in temperature is occurring; (2) contest its anthropogenic 
nature, stating that variations in climate are natural; (3) accept that human activ-
ity affects the climate, but argue that there are no noticeable negative impacts 
on the environment; and (4) cast doubt on the existence of scientific consensus 
(Björnberg et al. 2017: 235). Research has also shown that conservatism and 
free market endorsement are statistically correlated to rejection of climate sci-
ence (Lewandowsky et al. 2013; Uscinski et al. 2017), and that “conservative think 
tanks with funding from vested interests and political action committees have 
played a primary role in sourcing misinformation” to cast doubt about Climate 
Change (Sherwin 2021: 556). Hence, the consequences of Climate Change denial – 
as arguably “the most coordinated and well-moneyed form of science denial” 
(Björnberg et al. 2017: 235) – mostly come in the form of a decrease in public sup-
port, steering policy away from addressing this issue (Sherwin 2021: 556; Uscinski 
et al. 2017: 11) heavily affecting the future of the planet.
Given the relevance of this issue, the present article investigates Climate Change 
denial discourse as conspiracy theory – here defined from the perspective of semi-
otics as a representation (a narrative) that explains Climate Change (an event) as 
resulting from the activities of a group of people with covert and malicious inten-
tions (adapted from Leone et al. 2020: 44 and from Birchall 2006: 34). In this sense, 
“as a mode of interpretation [...], conspiracy theory might raise questions about cul-
tural analysis, about interpretation and knowing per se” (Birchall 2006: 66).


258	
Heidi Campana Piva
Parallelly, Butter and Knight (2020: 33) advise against treating conspiracy 
theory only as something destructive or harmful, arguing that it is often a creative 
response. Similarly, Thórisdóttir et al. (2020: 305) state that such theories can be 
“a constructive force in politics”, while Uscinski (2018: 234) goes so far as to argue 
that conspiracy theories are necessary for the healthy functioning of a democratic 
society, since they offer opposing political ideas, helping to “balance against con-
centrations of power”. Douglas et al. (2019: 20) suggest that “conspiracy theories 
may be associated with intentions to engage in political action against elites”, occa-
sionally triggering “behaviours aimed at challenging the status quo” which may, 
in turn, lead to the exposure of inconsistencies in official accounts of events as 
well as pressuring governments to be more transparent (Thórisdóttir et al. 2020; 
Douglas et al. 2019). 
Nevertheless, more often than not, they “have negative political and societal 
consequences” (Thórisdóttir et al. 2020: 305), since “conspiracy theories about 
the politically powerful may work differently than those involving [...] minorities” 
(Bergmann et al. 2020: 260). In other words, many conspiracy theories serve to 
strengthen existing power relations, further excluding certain groups from deci-
sion-making processes – which is mostly the case with Climate Change denial. 
Hence, a possible way to present “the difference between the political character 
of social struggles and conspiracy theories is that the latter are often tools in the 
hands of the political elite” (Puumeister 2020: 523).
Even if there are benefits to be found in the existence of conspiracy theories, 
it is important to distinguish between what Massimo Leone (2017) calls decon-
structive and conspiracy hermeneutics. There is a crucial difference between criti-
cism and conspiracy thinking which “cannot be made in terms of contents” but 
rather “must be made in terms of argumentative patterns” (Leone 2017: 229), that 
is, form. Despite many authors believing that conspiracy theories have benefi-
cial effects, the way in which these effects may be achieved – that is, the specific 
rhetoric adopted by conspiracy theories based on the symbolical reproduction of 
segregation – is already prejudicial in itself.
According to Douglas et al. (2019: 22), “it has become increasingly clear that 
conspiracy theories are likely to affect important social and political outcomes”. 
Consequently, it is extremely relevant to study their communication process 
and its social and political implications. The authors further suggest that “future 
research could begin to examine the interplay between ideology and conspiracy 
belief” by questioning how ideological variables are shaped in conspiratorial dis-
course, conclusively affecting social and political behaviour (Douglas et al. 2019: 
22).


	
Guiding interpretation towards deproblematization	
259
From the point of view of semiotics, Leone (2016: 15) suggests that the main 
problem of conspiracy theories surrounding science matters “lies not in their sup-
posed logical or scientific fallacy”, but in how they voice a social preoccupation, 
an “anguish toward the increasing deconstruction of scientific [...] knowledge in 
the new digital arenas”. Therefore, strategies such as increasing public cognitive 
skills, enhancing critical/analytical competences, and raising the levels of digital 
media literacy by themselves are not enough to stop anti-scientific discourse on 
social media. The problem runs deeper than just the matter of identifying logical 
fallacies in arguments or debunking false information; rather, it concerns the ways 
in which conspiracy narratives are semiotically constructed in terms of conflict.
For this reason, a better understanding of the formal conditions that allow con-
spiracy theories to shape interpretation may provide insights into the designing of 
more appropriate countermeasure programmes. By examining the semiotic mech-
anisms that may lead to influencing behaviour and generating action (including 
the construction of strongly polarized conflict, central to the logic of conspiracy 
theories), we may contribute to the development of new strategies to prevent and 
counter the spread of conspiracy theories. After all, without such understanding 
of the problem, uncovering solutions will lose viability.
In the interest of tackling this issue, the present paper regards a case study of 
Climate Change denial discourse on YouTube, with the aim of pointing to the 
interpretative mechanisms and discursive conditions on the level of form that con-
stitute and help spread such types of discourses, by describing how subjects and 
conflicts were constructed in the analysed text.
Overall, current research on conspiracy theories and their societal impact is 
vast, interdisciplinary, and its international scope traverses geographic boundar-
ies (Madisson 2014: 274; Douglas et al. 2019: 21). Past works have treated Climate 
Change denial as a conspiracy theory and analysed it through several qualita-
tive and quantitative means (especially through statistical analysis, linking belief 
in other conspiracy theories to Climate Change denial), in the fields of psychol-
ogy, communication, political and social sciences, as well as the humanities 
(Lewandowsky et al. 2013; Uscinski et al. 2017; Björnberg et al. 2017; Weigmann 
2018; Douglas et al. 2019; Giry, Tika 2020; Sherwin 2021). Climate Change denial 
has also been analysed semiotically by Paul Adams (2022), whose research draws 
from interviews with farmers to explore how people on the receiving end of con-
spiracy theories understand Climate Change.
In the present paper, this subject is explored by means of empirical semiotic 
analysis of a text in video format that can be understood as being a product of 
Climate Change denial conspiratorial discourse. The analysis follows a method-
ological framework that results from the blending of four methods (described in 


260	
Heidi Campana Piva
the next section), thus configuring a novel approach to the subject. The YouTube 
video adopted as an object of study was selected due to its popularity and con-
sequent capacity to impact large audiences, for both individuals featured in the 
video possess substantial social media following counts, having also appeared 
together in a previous video which has reached 2.5 million views. Besides its 
potential reach, this paper argues that this object is relevant since it presents a 
good example of how anti-scientific conspiracy theories are constructed, inasmuch 
as it fits the model (adapted from Leone et al. 2020 and Birchall 2006) defined at 
the beginning of the introduction, providing clear clues as to how this discourse 
follows anti-scientific conspiracy theory logic, and how other discourses pertain-
ing to the same category may also be thus identified.
The present study seeks to contribute to the research on conspiracy theories 
by proposing an investigation into a popular product of Climate Change denial 
discourse, pointing to the formal conditions that allow this type of discourse to 
shape interpretation. As such, the analysis of this specific object may consequently 
be used to draw bigger and more holistic understandings of Climate Change con-
spiracy theories, not only as flawed argumentation strategies, but as modelling, 
that is, as a guide for interpretation that has harmful effects on the development 
of society.
To achieve these objectives, the following Research Questions (RQ) are posed:
(RQ1)	 What are the primary meaning-making mechanisms and signifying prac-
tices instrumentalized in this text to shape ideological variables?
(RQ2)	 What types of relations, social identities, and conflicts are constructed in 
this discourse with regards to the scientific community?
(RQ3)	 What is the strategic aspect behind Climate Change denial discourse and 
its potential effect (how might belief feed into action)?
Materials and methods
The material under analysis is a video lasting nine minutes and 52 seconds and 
entitled Why I Said Global Warming is the Biggest Fraud in History – Dan Pena | 
London Real, uploaded to the London Real YouTube channel in July 2018. It was 
among the five most popular videos of the channel, having been viewed more than 
758,000 times as of May 2023. Around August 2023, however, the London Real 
channel was deleted; therefore, the video is no longer available for viewing.2 For 
2	
Although the channel no longer exists, the video can still be retrieved from the Internet 
Archive Wayback Machine (last accessed in Nov. 2023), and it is also available upon request 
from the author.


	
Guiding interpretation towards deproblematization	
261
an analysis to be possible, a transcription of relevant parts of the interview was 
carried out with references provided to the time (mm:ss) the quotations originally 
appeared in the video.
London Real was a weekly online talk show inaugurated over a decade ago, in 
2011. Despite its longevity of more than a decade, the YouTube channel only came 
into popularity recently,3 after its host and founder Brian Rose started producing 
videos with guests he considers “controversial” (Ondrak 2020). It is important to 
highlight that the YouTube videos were excerpts of content that is posted in full 
only on the London Real website (where one must subscribe and agree to be sent 
marketing communications to be conceded access).
It is also worth mentioning that the choice of this media product (a video) 
has methodological consequences, namely the fact that the text has an explicit 
author. A conspiracy theory does not have one single definite author, requiring the 
characterization of a Model Author for its analysis (Madisson, Ventsel 2020). In 
this sense, it may be possible to understand conspiracy theory as a type of ‘speech 
genre’ (Bakhtin 1986), whilst particular texts – as single meaningful units – often 
do have a specific author, which is the case of the material analysed here.
As for the methodology of analysis, the present research focuses on discourse, 
using semiotics as the foundation and employing mixed methods of qualitative 
analysis, namely Critical Discourse Analysis (Fairclough 1995); Political Discourse 
Analysis (Fairclough, Fairclough 2013); Relational Political Analysis (Selg, Ventsel 
2020); and Semiotic Approach to Strategic Conspiracy Narratives (Madisson, 
Ventsel 2020).
As a methodological perspective, semiotics presents three interrelated levels of 
analysis (Leone et al. 2020), namely: 
(1)	conspiracy theory analysed as modelling system (as mode of interpretation); 
allows for the identification of meaning-making mechanisms (RQ1);
(2)	 conspiracy theory analysed as representation (as text); relates to instrumental-
ized discursive and signifying practices (RQ1);
(3)	analysis of the processes of identity construction and self-description in con-
spiracy theories (RQ2).
Since this paper focuses on the Climate Change conspiracy theory as a discursive 
event (as an instance of language use), it is possible to relate these three levels of 
semiotic analysis with the three dimensions of discourse (and the perspectives 
through which discourse can be analysed) as described by Fairclough:
3	
In May 2020, the London Real YouTube channel had 1.83 million subscribers (Ondrak, Joe 
2020. London Real is falling down. Logically. Retrieved from: https://www.logically.ai/articles/
london-real-is-falling-down on 11 January 2022). By December 2022, the number had jumped 
to 2.18 million, indicating a recent rise in popularity.


262	
Heidi Campana Piva
(1) text – textual analysis consists of linguistic description, encompassing the 
“analysis of the texture of texts, their form and organization” (Fairclough 1995: 
4); complementary to Level 2;
(2)	discourse practice – intertextual analysis is the interpretation of the relation-
ship between text production, consumption, and distribution, as well as genre 
(language use associated with a social activity) and orders of discourse (rela-
tionships of complementarity, inclusion/exclusion, and opposition between 
discursive practices of a social domain). As such, “analysis of texts should not 
be artificially isolated from analysis of institutional and discoursal practices 
within which texts are embedded” (Fairclough 1995: 9). Texts are situational, 
but the relation between text and context may be generalizing. Intertextual 
analysis thus links text to context,4 relating to Level 1 above;
(3) sociocultural practice – social analysis consists in the explanation of the dis-
cursive event as a whole, relating to society and culture, since social and cul-
tural phenomena are realized in the textual properties of a text (Fairclough 
1995: 4); relates to Level 3 and helps answer RQ3.
To carry out analysis on the second and third levels more thoroughly (and better 
answer RQ2), I am also drawing from the methodology proposed by Peeter Selg 
and Andreas Ventsel (2020), where the focus is on form (as a network of rela-
tions) rather than content (as in ‘substance’), which is a preoccupation that already 
appeared in what has been described above as ‘textual analysis’ (Fairclough 1995). 
In this view, components of a discursive event cannot exist apart from it, which 
also means that such aspects do not precede the event in time (as the components 
spring into existence, so does the event itself). Comparable to the relational nature 
of the sign in semiotics (not intelligible in isolation), political communication and 
its elements as well as social context are to be analysed “separately, but not as being 
separate” (Selg, Ventsel 2020: 215). From this perspective, sign systems, meaning-
making, communication, and social identities are conceptualized “in terms of 
power relations” (Selg, Ventsel 2020: 7).
In a complementary manner, I further draw from the methodology proposed 
by Mari-Liis Madisson and Ventsel, who describe conflict construction as the 
core of conspiracy theories, “characterised by strongly polarised identity creation” 
4	
Intertextuality (Kristeva 1980) and interdiscursivity (Fairclough 1995) call for the charac-
terization of text and discourse as paradoxical phenomena, where there is a unity (a whole with 
boundaries) but at the same time this whole “emerges from an open, uncountable plurality of 
heterogeneous and multidimensional components” (Selg, Ventsel 2020: 127). In other words, 
even though “text is usually understood as a monologue”, it is actually a dialogue (especially 
when it is in cyberspace – a place of interchange) and therefore, “it cannot have closure in any 
strict sense” (Sonesson 1998: 18).


	
Guiding interpretation towards deproblematization	
263
(Madisson, Ventsel 2020:  37). Relating to the first level of semiotic analysis (con-
spiracy theory as a modelling system), conspiracy narratives model the world “as 
two sides in a permanent conflict situation”, and the symbolic function of such 
narratives is strategic, as they “offer an organising and meaningful narrative” to 
existence (Madisson, Ventsel 2020: 38).
To understand matters of strategy and the potential effects of messages (RQ3), 
the analysed text is taken as ‘political discourse’, which is, according to Isabela 
Fairclough and Norman Fairclough (2013), a form of practical argumentation that 
can ground decision. In other words, political discourse is premised on the capac-
ity of actors to drive change, which in turn implies strategy – that is, actors can 
develop strategies (plans of action) to change the state of affairs in particular direc-
tions (Fairclough, Fairclough 2013: 24–26). From this perspective, even though 
strategies have a discursive dimension, since they are developed and formulated 
in discourse, “argumentation cannot be viewed as a ‘discursive’ strategy in itself”, 
because strategies “involve goals which are outside and beyond discourse, i.e. they 
involve desired changes in the world, not in discourse” (Fairclough, Fairclough 
2013: 24–25). Therefore, the focus of analysis is on how the “ways of representing 
the world enter as premises into reasoning about what we should do” (Fairclough, 
Fairclough 2013: 86), or how beliefs feed into action (RQ3). In other words, dis-
course as representation (Level 2 – conspiracy theory as text) comprises premises 
of practical arguments and serves as reasons for action, “not only describe[ing] 
what social reality is” (Level 1 – conspiracy theory as modelling), “but also what it 
should be” (Fairclough, Fairclough 2013: 103).
At last, it is relevant to point out that the interests of “micro” social analysis can 
be understood as forms of social action, existing in a dialectical relationship with 
“macro” social concerns (Fairclough 1995). This paper works with an instance of 
a discourse, seeking to identify practices instrumentalized in it that are believed 
to be operative also in other texts belonging to the same discursive context, fol-
lowing Geertz’s (1973) hermeneutic notion that cultural analysis is meant to dis-
cern critical structures and established codes from specific instances that can later 
be applied to new understandings of the system and its rules that govern these 
instances. Despite the limitations of this study – working within the limits of dis-
course analysis – the investigation of something particular (a video) can still be 
revealing of superstructures.


264	
Heidi Campana Piva
1. Transcript analysis
Ideologies cannot be disassociated from the understanding of discourse 
(Fairclough 1995: 71); however, to say that a discourse works ideologically is 
not the same thing as to say that it is false. In fact, it has little to do with judge-
ments of truth or falsity5 per se, relating instead to whether statements are well-
grounded and how discourse “contributes to the reproduction of relations of 
power” (Fairclough 1995: 18). Additionally, power – in the sense of a semiotics 
of power – is also textual, which is to say it is constitutional of signification and 
meaning (Selg, Ventsel 2020: 108). Arising out of this foundation, the present sec-
tion seeks to provide an analysis of the ideological aspects of the video based on 
rhetorical practice, grounding strategies, and power relations.
1.1. Rhetorical practice
From the video transcription excerpt found below (where BR stands for Brian Rose 
and DP for Dan Peña), ideological elements – implicit content or, in Gramscian 
terms, ‘common sense’ – can be identified as taking part in meaning-making.
00:03	 BR: We were on stage and a woman got up and asked you a question about 
Global Warming. And you went on to explain why you don’t believe in it. 
Uh, you said you changed your – no, you said you’ve got some new evi-
dence recently
00:12	 DP: Yep
00:14	 BR: What happened that night?
00:15	 DP: Ok
00:16	 BR: Why did that clip go viral?
00:17	 DP: The lady, uh, said “I’ve children and you’ve got a few bucks, and don’t 
you want – I wanna leave the world a better place for my kids”, essentially 
what she was saying
00:26	 BR: Right. Which is a good question
00:27	 DP: [shrugs] Yeah, it’s fine
00:28	 BR: Do you?
00:29	 DP: Yeah, I – I’d like my children – I want my children very much, but I 
realize it’s up to them, it’s not up to me. You see? I put responsibility –
00:37	 BR: You are one of the biggest force-multipliers in the world
00:39	 DP: Yeah, but I
5	
Even if ideology does not equal falsity, it is still in the domain of critical discourse analysis to 
question truth, through exclusion (omission), distortion, or falsification of content (Fairclough 
1995: 18).


	
Guiding interpretation towards deproblematization	
265
00:40	 BR: They don’t have a
00:41	 DP: It’s up to the individual. I can give you all the information, but if you 
don’t pull the trigger and take action...
That which is excluded from a text is often overlooked in textual analysis 
(Fairclough 1995: 210) and yet the choice of what not to say is as relevant as the 
choice of what to say. Peña or Rose could have described the occasion that they 
are talking about (first mentioned by Rose at 00:03) in a more explicit and detailed 
manner, but they chose not to. All the viewer knows going into this video is that 
Peña was on stage (Where? Why? What was the subject he was talking about that 
prompted the question from the lady? Was she in the audience or was she part of 
some panel together with Peña?).6 Since the viewer has virtually no contextual 
information regarding this occasion and is presented with an unclear account of 
what precisely was questioned during that event in the first place, the focus falls 
inadvertently on Peña’s answer instead of the question that preceded it.
When Peña says “don’t you want-” (00:17), he cuts himself off, choosing to 
change the subject of the phrase from ‘you’ to ‘I’. “Don’t you want” previously 
referred to the lady asking something of Peña. By shifting it to “I wanna”, the 
subject falls back to the lady, who is being quoted. Hence, wanting a better world 
is now a desire from the part of the lady. Based on “I’ve children and you’ve got 
a few bucks” and “I wanna leave the world a better place for my kids”, one can 
assume the lady was referring to the idea that people with financial resource have a 
responsibility towards the world. What is said at 00:29 can be understood as some-
thing along the lines of “I also want my children to have a better world”, which is 
quickly followed up by “but I realize it’s up to them, it’s not up to me”. Here, we see 
Peña redirecting the responsibility to the next generation, concomitantly freeing 
his own from being held accountable.
At 00:37, Rose recalls the fact that Peña is “one of the biggest force-multipliers 
in the world”. Peña’s response at 00:41 is, again, the redirection of responsibility: 
“It’s up to the individual. I can give you all the information, but if you don’t pull 
the trigger and take action...” (00:41). Recalling the change of subject occurring at 
00:17 (from “don’t you want” to “I wanna”), it is interesting to see how the mean-
ing shifts with this switch: if you want a better world, it is your responsibility.
6	
The “clip that went viral” mentioned by Rose (00:16), containing the information about 
the event being discussed at the beginning of this interview, was another video of the London 
Real channel entitled Is Global Warming The Biggest Fraud In History? which had more than 
2.5 million views (as of June 2023). By watching this other video, one may find inconsistencies 
between what has been recorded and Peña’s retelling of the situation. Although the channel no 
longer exists, this video can still be retrieved from the Internet Archive Wayback Machine (last 
accessed in October 2023), and it is also available upon request from the author.


266	
Heidi Campana Piva
It is important to highlight that nowhere in his answer did Peña acknowledge 
his financial status. The choice of expressions such as “you’ve got a few bucks” and 
“force multiplier”, instead of “rich” or “in possession of a great amount of money” 
is interesting to note. In his answer (00:41), Peña mentions “giving information”,7 
yet he completely ignores the financial aspect of the question. One can interpret 
this omission along the same lines: it does not matter that I am in possession of 
great financial resources, it is not up to me to fix the world, it is up to you, the one 
who is asking. Clearly, such an explicit statement would not be received well by any 
audience. However, the way Peña puts it – by avoiding touching on the financial 
subject and giving answers that are hard to follow – his discourse ends up as quite 
appealing, especially to neoliberals inclined towards meritocracy and individual-
ism (“It’s up to the individual” – 00:41). This way, Peña’s discourse has an inspiring 
effect: change is in your power, you need to pull the trigger and take action.
Furthermore, it is possible to recognize that so far the only instances when 
Global Warming was explicitly mentioned were at the very start of the interview, 
when Rose says “let’s talk about Global Warming” (00:01) and “asked you a ques-
tion about Global Warming” (00:03). After that, Peña mentions “leave the world 
a better place” as a supposed quotation of what the lady was saying, and from that 
point on, both Peña and Rose only refer vaguely to a so-called “responsibility” – at 
least until 01:53 when the words “Global Warming” are explicitly said once again. 
Until then, it is not clear what this responsibility or “make the world better” pre-
cisely means.
1.2. Grounding strategies
Another excerpt of the interview provides more examples of other such “common” 
processes, relations, and structures that are often taken for granted in discourse:
07:35	 DP: Now, since then, since the thing went viral because of your movie pre-
miere, I had my crack-staff do some research, and then I double-checked 
the research, only found one error, and the, uh... you know how many 
people have been to the North and South Pole? Both? Since the beginning 
of motherfucking time? Recorded time
08:03	 BR: Couple of hundred?
7	
This phrase gains another layer of meaning when one is aware of contextual information 
regarding Peña’s main occupation nowadays, which is selling coaching courses on public 
speaking, motivation, administration, and how to become as financially successful as himself 
(Sahagún, Louis 2021. How a scrappy Chicano from L.A. Came to own a Scottish castle. Los 
Angeles Times. Retrieved from: https://www.latimes.com/california/story/2021-04-19/how-a-
scrappy-chicano-from-la-came-to-own-a-scottish-castle, 11 January 2022).
2021). Quite literally, Peña has made a business out of “giving information”.


	
Guiding interpretation towards deproblematization	
267
08:04	 DP: [gesticulates down]
08:05	 BR: Just you and Sally?
08:06	 DP: No, no, no. [...] Not counting the teams, but the lead people?
08:12	 BR: Yeah?
08:13	 DP: Ten people, plus Sally and I. Twelve! Since the beginning of fucking 
time
08:20	 BR: [nods]
08:22	 DP: You know how many of these other ten are bitching about Global 
Warming? [pause] Zero!
In this excerpt, Peña is presenting information that he knows for a fact. As far-
fetched as it may seem that only twelve “lead people” have ever been to the North 
and South Poles since the beginning of recorded time, the question here is not 
whether Peña is providing a “faithful” representation of reality, but rather, which 
signifying practices he is using to ground his affirmation, to convince people 
that he is conveying reliable information. The way this is done is by presenting a 
deductively valid argument that is constructed onto false premises:
Premise 1:	
Twelve people have ever been to the North and South Poles.
Premise 2:	
None of these people are complaining about Global Warming.
Argument:	 Global Warming is a hoax.
Surely, there is one premise that is missing from that argument for it to be deduc-
tively valid, which would be:
Premise 3:	
Only people who have been to the North and South poles are able to 
assess the veracity of Global Warming.
For the sake of discussion, let us assume that Premise 3 is subjectively included in 
Peña’s argumentation. Therefore, his argument
[...] is deductively valid, because it is not possible both for its premises to be true 
and the conclusion to be false. If, for some reason, the premises were true, then the 
conclusion would have to be true. However, the argument is not sound (because 
the premises are actually false). Unlike soundness, validity has nothing to do with 
the actual truth of the premises.  (Fairclough, Fairclough 2013: 37)
The example below also displays how the deductive validity of Peña’s arguments 
are not dependent upon empirical evidence, but “solely on the meanings of the 
terms” (Fairclough, Fairclough 2013: 37).
00:51 Sally and I were in the South Pole, 2011, and we’re there and there’s a big 
half-a-million-dollar scientific station there, that’s mostly funded by the US 


268	
Heidi Campana Piva
government, and uh, the scientists came over and gave us these presentations. 
They had at that time- they’d drilled five, or six, or seven thousand cores uh, in 
the South Pole. [...] And so he’s going through these cores and he says: fifteen 
thousand years ago it was two- uh, one point nine six degrees warmer Celsius than 
today and- STOP STOP STOP! Let’s go back to that, how do you know that? And 
then all these MIT, CalTech, all these guys- oh, because this equals that bullshit, 
bullshit. We know for- absolutely within a millionth of a percent, it was warmer.
As Fairclough (1995: 139) puts it, one can see here the “instrumentalization of 
discursive practices, involving the subordination of meaning to, and the manipu-
lation of meaning for, instrumental effect”. In the quote above, Peña mentions 
people from the MIT and CalTech who allegedly told him that the South Pole 
was warmer in the past than it is in the present (“because this equals that”). 
Supposedly, these scientists came to this conclusion by drilling a non-specific 
number of (“five, or six, or seven thousand”) cores in the South Pole. Moreover, 
CalTech and the MIT are world-famous institutions known by most people to 
be trustworthy sources of information (highly naturalized ideology). Therefore, 
quoting these institutions is a way to ground a statement. The same can be applied 
to the use of the word ‘scientists’, which represents actors that, given their role in 
society and our ideological preconceptions, are also imbued with the notion of 
legitimacy and reliability.
To a similar effect, Peña quotes the journal Scientific American:
02:12	 DP: They say it has nothing to do with the hairspray, the ozone, nothing, 
zero. In fact, if you read Scientific American, [...] you would’ve known three 
months ago they said for the first time in forty years the ozone- what do you 
call- is uh, thickened up again.
In summary, by referencing institutions and social actors which, due to our back-
ground knowledge, are considered reliable information sources, Peña grounds his 
premises to convince the viewer of the soundness of his argument.
Furthermore, there are also strategies that Peña uses to characterize himself 
as reliable. At 07:35, he states: “I had my crack-staff do some research and then 
I double-checked the research, only found one error.” The fact that he was able 
to find one error in his crack-staff’s research seems to point to how capable and 
knowledgeable he is regarding the subject (even though viewers cannot be sure 
what this subject precisely is). Similarly, Peña mentions that he was supposed to 
be on a panel in George Mason University (08:34), once again attesting to his 
status as an academically respected person in possession of valid information to 
be shared.


	
Guiding interpretation towards deproblematization	
269
Interestingly, Rose seems to pick up on Peña’s strategies, since he subsequently 
poses the following question, getting the following reply:
08:49	 BR: And so you’re saying because you were at the South, you were at the 
North, I mean, it doesn’t make you an expert, are you saying-
08:53	 DP: No, no, but I talked to the experts. Who-
08:55	 BR: Ok. And none of them buy it?
08:56	 DP: These journalists! These fucking journalists that are writing about it, 
they haven’t talked to dick! They haven’t talked to anybody. Nobody has 
asked me what I saw there. Nobody has asked me, the scientists that I met 
with.
The word ‘experts’ serves a similar function to that of ‘scientists’, referring to 
people whose role in society serves to characterize them as reliable information 
sources. Having “talked to the experts” (08:53), while his critics (“these journal-
ists” – 08:56) have supposedly not, Peña establishes that only he is in possession of 
the truthful, legitimate information regarding Global Warming.
2. Form/content
So far, it seems clear how ideology permeates the conversation on the textual level 
(such as using the subject ‘you’ instead of ‘I’ to redirect responsibility), interpreta-
tion level (using deductively valid arguments based on false premises), and socio-
cultural level (referencing reliable institutions and societal actors to ground state-
ments). Besides, the very fact that Rose and Peña are taking turns while speaking 
is also dependent on ideology (what Fairclough calls ‘orderliness’).
Additionally, background knowledge of what the situation (an interview) 
requires is what defines the social relationship between Rose and Peña (as ‘host’ 
and ‘guest’), as well as the roles that this relationship entails (the guest respectfully 
answers the questions from the host). Further preconceptions of the situation (a 
YouTube interview) allow Peña to swear and cuss throughout the conversation, 
which he probably would not do, for instance, on television – a simple example of 
how contents are realized in forms, and different forms entail different contents 
(Fairclough 1995: 188).
The relational analysis framework (Selg, Ventsel 2020) mentioned in the meth-
ods section consists of general labels or categories referring to ideal types where 
one may identify certain prevailing logics of political articulation (not ideological 
content). Since a “pure” form of communication exists nowhere but in theory, I 
am highlighting only the most predominant form that can be identified in the 


270	
Heidi Campana Piva
discourse of this video, which is ‘phatic communication’ linked to authoritarian 
populism (de-democratization).
The term ‘phatic communication’ was borrowed from Jakobson’s language 
functions to determine exchanges carried out on the basis of habitualized stan-
dards or ritualized formulas (reification), as well as affective attitudes, appealing 
to stereotypes, myths, bias mobilization, and tacit knowledge (Selg, Ventsel 2020). 
The notion of habits, in this sense, can be connected to the rules described by 
Fairclough (1995) that are entailed in a particular kind of social activity (i.e. the 
roles of ‘host’ and ‘guest’, orderliness, and other rules imposed by the interview 
genre).
As a deeply affective form, phatic communication is virtually empty from the 
informational perspective (Selg, Ventsel 2020: 138–184). To illustrate this, I pres-
ent the following transcription excerpt:
02:12	 DP: They say it has nothing to do with the hairspray, the ozone, nothing, 
zero. In fact, if you read Scientific American, like the good MIT guy you are, 
you would’ve known three months ago they said for the first time in forty 
years the ozone- what do you call- is uh, thickened up again
02:27	 BR: Yeah, the ozone has, but that’s a little different than carbon dioxide 
emissions, all that stuff
02:31	 DP: They also said that we’ve known for at least fifty, sixty, seventy years that 
every square meter on the ground of the planet has between ten and fifteen 
thousand times more energy from the sun than it’s needed. Ten to fifteen 
thousand. How does it vary? You’re closer to the sun, it’s fifteen thousand, 
farther from the sun, ten thousand.
02:53	 BR: Ok, what does that mean? There’s tons of energy
02:55	 DP: Tons! Tons and tons. Ok, the first electric car was in 1846 I believe. I 
don’t believe, I know. 1846. Do you think, if we really wanted fucking elec-
tric cars, we couldn’t have them? It was 35 or 40 years before gasoline cars. 
But now, since then, and then the question is- Sally and I went to the North 
Pole
03:17	 BR: Ok. But the electric car thing is because the oil business and all that, 
right?
03:20	 DP: Correct. I’ll get back to that
03:21	 BR: We’ll get back to that
03:22	 DP: So, then we go to the North Pole and now there’s Russian scientists. 
Hardly anybody spoke English. Ok? And we got re-married at the North 
Pole and we talked to the scientists and, same questions, same answers as 
we got from the South Pole, Global Warming, they all laughed drinking 
vodka [mimicking]. Everybody is drinking in the North Pole, cause the 


	
Guiding interpretation towards deproblematization	
271
Russians, and Russians do like to drink vodka, as they say. And they say 
yeah, it’s just a load of shit, everybody knows it’s a load of shit and we’ve 
known it for years. When I was in the energy business, and forever more I’ll 
be an oil man, ok?
03:53	 BR: You are an oil man
03:54	 DP: Well, an oil man. Everybody laug- everybody knew that when people 
will take more seriously Global Warming is when Aramco, Saudi, the 
Kingdom, runs out of oil. Now, two years ago, Aramco, which is uh, the 
petroleum company of the Saudi government, and how they’re gonna go 
public. This was when oil was twenty-eight dollars a barrel. Now why would 
smart guys, MIT kinda guys, say they’re gonna go public at the lowest oil 
price in the last thirty, forty years? Why?
04:32	 BR: Why?
04:33	 DP: Because when you go public, [...] they’re gonna have to tell what the 
reserves are, and you know what the price of oil is gonna do when they say 
that there’s forty-two kazillion-jillion barrels of oil?
06:07	 BR: Gonna drop
06:08	 DP: Like a fucking stone!
06:10	 BR: So what does this have to do with Global Warming?
06:11	 DP: Nah, because Global Warming is an anomaly, based on, hyped-up by 
this generation, for something to bitch about. We’ve had it. We’ve had it fifty 
thousand years ago, had it three hundred thousand years ago, but to blame 
it on us is bullshit
06:33	 BR: Isn’t it not accelerated by human’s carbon emissions?
06:35	 DP: Uh, one hundredth million of a percent, who cares
06:37	 BR: Ok, so this is just a scam and a sham and all this-
06:40	 DP: I’m jealous of vice-president what’s-his-face
06:42	 BR: Gore
06:43	 DP: Gore! I’m jealous. And Sally and I were in a plane with him. A few 
years ago, he got in trouble because of the footprint, you know, the big G3 
he flies around, G5 I guess it is, and so he was flying commercial, we were 
coming back from Peru, Lima. And Sally and I were doing some Safari, and 
I noticed why all these guys with fucking suits in here- business, cause they 
had no first class, and so it’s vice-president Gore, he stands up and the- uh, 
and he’s not as tall- you know all these people that say they’re six-three, I 
mean, Jesus Christ, I mean he’s about your height. And you know
07:16	 BR: Everyone says that I’m
07:17	 DP: Only six-one, he’s only six one! He’s about
07:19	 BR: Everyone says I’m as tall as you!


272	
Heidi Campana Piva
07:20	 DP: Yeah
07:21	 BR: How tall are you?
07:22	 DP: I’m six-one
07:23	 BR: Ok. I’m not six-one
07:24	 DP: No, no
07:25	 BR: Ok
07:26	 DP: And, uh, so
07:27	 BR: Does Gore believe in Climate Change or is it all made-up?
07:30	 DP: I don’t know, I can’t speak for the former vice-president, but he’s gotta 
know the same stats I know.
The simplest aspect of phatic communication that can be identified in this excerpt 
of the video is the appeal to stereotypes, starting with the non-English-speaking 
Vodka-drinking Russian scientists (03:22), all the way up to “MIT kinda guys” 
(03:54). However, the most overwhelming aspect that characterizes this as phatic 
communication is the fact that Peña does not finish one single line of thought. He 
starts by saying that Scientific American published results pointing to the thicken-
ing of the ozone layer (02:12). Rose, then, points to how this does not necessarily 
mean that Global Warming is a fraud, seeing how the ozone layer thickening is 
a different matter than carbon dioxide emissions (02:27). Peña never acknowl-
edges that nor tries to explain how the ozone layer thickening is connected to 
his argument that Global Warming is fake. Instead, he moves on to how, for the 
last seventy years, we have known that the surface of the Earth receives a lot of 
energy from the sun (02:31), and how we could’ve had electric cars since the 1800’s 
(02:55) if not for the matter of oil sovereignty (03:17–03:20). It is not in any way 
explained how this is related to Global Warming being a hoax.
Surely, the matters of fossil fuel and solar energy are intrinsically tied to the 
subject of Climate Change as, respectively, one of the main causes of it and one 
possible way to mitigate it. But the way through which Peña presents the case fails 
to add to his argumentation. Global Warming can be a real thing and we can still 
live in a world where we could, allegedly, have had electric cars for the last two 
hundred years if not for the influence of oil companies (which is, in itself, a whole 
other conspiracy theory). Here, Peña says something that is easy to believe, but 
that essentially means nothing, or at least it does not serve to justify his argument, 
so we are still dealing with informational net zero.
This gets even more pronounced as the conversation goes on. Peña jumps from 
the electric cars to another story where he is in the North Pole with his wife. This 
story, apart from the colourful depiction of the Russian scientists, is very similar 
to the story about his visit to the South Pole. After this repetition, he comes back 


	
Guiding interpretation towards deproblematization	
273
to the matter of oil. Between 04:33 and 06:07, Peña says 253 words (which were 
shortened above due to their semantic irrelevance) about the workings of oil busi-
nesses when they are “going public” or selling part of their oil stock. Most of it 
is vague and provides for no concrete information (such as “forty-two kazillion-
jillion barrels”). When Rose enquires again “what does this have to do with the 
Global Warming?” (06:10), Peña answers: “it’s made up”. There is simply no con-
nection between Global Warming being a hoax and the very long talk about the 
fluctuations of oil price. Even though the audience knows that the workings of the 
oil business are deeply connected to the matter of Climate Change, Peña utterly 
fails to explain how that could be used to argue that there is no Climate Change.
In the end, after saying that Global Warming was invented “by this generation”, 
Peña skips to another story about the former American vice-president Albert Gore 
which never gets to its conclusion, because Peña stops in the middle to talk about 
how tall Gore is. Rose tries to recall the story by asking if Gore agreed with Peña 
regarding Global Warming, but we have no way of knowing if this is where the 
story was initially going, seeing how Peña never finishes it. Nevertheless, it is still 
interesting to note that Peña starts talking about Gore by stating that he is, in fact, 
much shorter than what he claims (06:43). This seemingly innocent accusation 
serves a very serious purpose of painting Gore (an environmentalist, founder of 
The Climate Reality Project, a non-profit organization that deals with potential 
solutions for the climate crisis) as a man who lies, or at least distorts the truth. 
Besides, for those who are not aware of who Gore is, the story serves nothing more 
than to confuse and frustrate them.
Hopefully, it has become clear how the communication in this video is phatic, 
meaning that it serves no other function than to just “say things”, in other words, 
communication for communication’s sake. This form can also be associated with an 
influencing strategy called ‘information fog’, in which the speaker presents “pieces 
of information, contradictions, fabrications, misleading information and down-
right lies” up to a point where the interpreter becomes incapable of differentiating 
between truth and falsity, right and wrong, fact and fabrication (Madisson, Ventsel 
2020: 20).
The way Peña talks about the amount of energy coming from the sun (02:31), 
the story of the electric car (02:55), the lengthy description of oil businesses 
(04:33), and both stories about the South and North Poles (00:51 and 03:22) also 
showcase how semantic gaps allow the interpreter to “be led towards desired asso-
ciations” and to the unification of what are actually “irreconcilable levels of mean-
ing” (Madisson, Ventsel 2020: 5). Some of these stories contradict one another, 
while others offer repetition. Peña tells “open-ended (and sometimes even con-
troversial) sets of stories”, while the interpreter is left to “navigate through various 


274	
Heidi Campana Piva
plot fragments and draw his/her own conclusions about causalities” (Madisson, 
Ventsel 2020: 94). At the same time, given the discrete nature of conspiracy theo-
ries, “an important role in achieving cohesion between different entries is played 
by the consistent repetition of invariant elements of the narrative” (Madisson, 
Ventsel 2020: 99). So, even though there is nothing that connects the explanation 
of the oil business, solar energy, and the electric car to Climate Change being false, 
the repetitions provided by the South and North Pole stories grant some coher-
ence to the discourse.
Another concept that is associated with the phatic form of communication is 
the notion of ‘myth’ (Barthes 1973). By revoking complexity in favour of turning 
everything into simple essence, things are reduced to only those parts that are 
immediately visible, without contradictions (Selg, Ventsel 2020: 138). This can 
be seen in the video, mainly, in two instances: first, at the beginning, where Peña 
states that if you want to leave the world a better place, it is up to you, as an indi-
vidual, and no one else; and then, again, when he says that Global Warming was 
invented by this generation as something to complain about.
Another of the features of phatic communication, as described by Selg and 
Ventsel (2020: 185), that can also be seen in this video is the characterization of an 
enemy that is public, “passive, ‘official’, and addressed indirectly and abstractly”. 
At 08:56, Peña talks about “journalists” in a very emotive way (his voice picks up 
and his face gets redder). He describes them as just “these journalists” that “haven’t 
talked to anybody”, thus referencing to such opponents in an indirect and abstract 
manner. Because they have not talked to anybody, this enemy is also passive, for 
they have not been seeking the truth like Peña has. Further, since ‘journalists’ 
is a word that refers to a social role (in the same way that the word ‘scientists’ 
does), it is also based on the common-sense stereotypical characteristic of phatic 
communication.
Lastly, it is interesting to point to the use of curse and swear words (as well as 
heightened voice and a generally impolite and emotive speech) that are features 
of populist discourse. The link between populist discourse and conspiracy theory 
has also been pointed out in the literature (Bergmann, Butter 2020; Van Prooijen 
et al. 2022; Pirro, Taggart 2023).
Overall, Selg and Ventsel (2020: 185–186) state that the phatic form of com-
munication can include “various strategies of deproblematization of policy issues”, 
one of which is “deproblematization through stoicism”, that is, appealing to the 
“naturalness” of things. In general terms, “phatic communication is oriented to 
presenting given social reality as fixed, unproblematic, and uncontested” (Selg, 
Ventsel 2020: 185–186). The ultimate example can be found at 06:11, where Peña 
argues that we have always had a Global Warming (“We’ve had it fifty thousand 


	
Guiding interpretation towards deproblematization	
275
years ago”). This is the most prominent example of deproblematization through 
stoicism: we should not worry about Global Warming, we should not pressure our 
governments to take action to mitigate it or to punish companies who are refusing to 
comply with regulations for GHG emissions, because Global Warming is a natural 
thing, and natural things should stay as they are.
3. Identities and conflict construction
People make discourse at the same time as “discourse makes people” (Fairclough 
1995: 39). In other words, subjects are constructed in discourse according to 
ideological processes and semiotic choices (contingencies) in a way that textual 
construction of identities is a constantly developing and transforming process of 
meaning-making (Madisson, Ventsel 2020: 12). This process is relational, mean-
ing that identities are as they are only in relation to other identities (Selg, Ventsel 
2020: 18). In the case of conspiracy theories – since identity creation is strongly 
polarized by the antagonistic opposition of ‘us’ vs ‘them’ (Madisson, Ventsel 
2020) – ‘us’ can only be understood as ‘us’ when in opposition to ‘them’. Therefore, 
the strategic core of this type of discourse is the construction of conflict, where the 
identities of the subjects are constituted by an antagonistic relation.
The first type of conflict that can be recognized in the analysed text is the one 
surrounding legitimacy. In this case, Peña argues that the journalists (‘them’), 
having not talked to the experts (08:56), are disseminating false information, 
whilst Peña is the one in possession of the real facts, which he obtained first hand 
from the real scientists at the North and South Poles (‘us’). In this sense, the iden-
tities of ‘us’ and ‘them’ are being constructed on the grounds of ‘those who have 
the legitimate facts’ and ‘those who are spreading lies’.
Surprisingly enough, this shows how anti-scientific discourse often establishes 
relations to science that are not necessarily those of opposition. Peña is not against 
scientists, nor does he understand himself as a producer/propagator of anti-sci-
entific discourse. On the contrary, he establishes his side (‘us’) as the one who is 
in line with the real experts, in possession of the actual scientific knowledge. This 
complicates the situation, for it seems that what is at stake is no longer the cred-
ibility of Science as a practice and body of knowledge, but rather the issue seems 
to be which science we are talking about. The fragmentation of science into ‘real’ vs 
‘fake science’ can be even more dangerous than the ample question of the loss of 
authority of the scientific community.
Another opposition that can be identified in the construction of identities in 
this video is the generational conflict between baby boomers and millennials/


276	
Heidi Campana Piva
gen-Z or, as Peña refers to them in the video, “this generation” (06:11). Besides 
that, the video starts with Rose saying: “Let’s talk about Global Warming, then 
I wanna get to the snowflakes” (00:01). The word ‘snowflakes’ refers to a slang 
expression that emerged around 2015 “as a means of criticising the hypersensitiv-
ity of a younger generation” (Nicholson 2016: 1). Embedded in political meaning, 
the use of the word ‘snowflakes’ also serves to characterize Peña and Rose, seeing 
that this slang is “mostly lobbed from the right to the left” (Nicholson 2016: 1), 
with the aim of invalidating arguments coming from younger people on the basis 
that they are supposedly too easily offended and cannot take criticism. By employ-
ing this term, Peña and Rose are also constructing their own identities as people 
who agree that younger generations are hypersensitive, which is consistent with 
the rest of the video’s discourse.
The generational conflict is most explicit at 06:11, when Peña states: “Global 
Warming is an anomaly, based on- hyped up by this generation, for something to 
bitch about”. I would also like to highlight the use of the word ‘us’ at the end of this 
sentence (“but to blame it on us is bullshit”), which may be referring not only to 
Peña’s generation, but also to his social status, economic profile, or even the fact 
that he is a self-proclaimed “oil man” (03:22). It is unclear whether this statement 
is meant to absolve older generations of the responsibility for Climate Change, or 
the companies and businesspeople from richer layers of society (including the oil 
business), or most likely both. All in all, the identity construction of ‘us’ and ‘them’ 
is quite fuzzy, allowing for a certain extent of malleability of this discourse, in a 
way that it may be made to fit different situations, appealing to different people.
4. Potential effects and social impact
Since the climate crisis is an issue rooted in the functioning of late-capitalist soci-
ety, possible solutions that are often proposed to deal with it entail drastic societal 
transformation, which would inadvertently affect mostly the layers of society to 
which Peña and Rose belong. For Peña and his supporters, the idea that Global 
Warming was invented by newer generations and journalists as something to com-
plain about entails that it is being used as an excuse to ask for a change – one that 
is necessary to solve the climate crisis and that threatens Peña’s very way of life.
Hence, the Global Warming conspiracy theory, as represented by this video, 
can be described as follows: Global Warming (an event) has been invented by newer 
generations (is the result of a group of people) with the help of worldwide acts of 
scientific and journalistic misconduct (acting in secret), for the purpose of under-
mining the status quo (to an evil end).


	
Guiding interpretation towards deproblematization	
277
As mentioned in the Introduction, conspiracy theories possess a counterhe-
gemonic potential (Birchall 2006; Leone 2016; Uscinski 2018; Thórisdóttir et al. 
2020; Madisson, Ventsel 2020), that is, they recognize most forms of authority 
as undesirable. Nevertheless, conspiratorial discourse can be both against main-
stream knowledge and concomitantly serve as a strategic tool in the hands of 
the dominant regime (Madisson, Ventsel 2020: 42; Puumeister 2020: 523). This 
is especially true when it comes to Climate Change denial and the discourse 
being constructed in this video. Peña is pro-establishment insofar as he advo-
cates that things should be left as they are, since this is the way they have always 
been. Therefore, the discourse of this video – as both a product and a component 
of Climate Change conspiracy theories – supports the conservation of ongoing 
power relations and the current state of affairs.
Moreover, research has demonstrated that “Climate Change conspiracy theo-
ries not only influenced intentions to engage in efforts to reduce one’s carbon 
footprint, but also reduced intentions to engage in politics” (Jolley, Douglas 2012: 
17). Along the same lines, it is understood that “conspiracy theories can be seen 
as the product of taking political positions, and their description of the world is 
often constructed in an attempt to mobilise people in a specific political struggle” 
(Bergmann et al. 2020: 259). In fact, Douglas et al. (2019: 13) argue that the pri-
mary function of conspiracy theories as means of interpretation is to “communi-
cate information to generate collective action in the face of threat”.
It may also be relevant to point out the matter of conspiracy entrepreneurship, 
that is, conspiracy theorizing as a business. The notion of conspiracy theories as 
being lucrative enterprises for many actors is being widely discussed in recent lit-
erature (see Harambam 2020; Hyzen, Bulck 2021 and Turza 2023 for related case 
studies). The so-called “conspiracy entrepreneurs” are those who economically 
thrive (Harambam 2020) from generating and spreading of discourse “expressed 
as alternative histories, science, political views, interpretations, amongst others, to 
affect public opinion” (Hyzen, Bulck 2021: 182). According to Hyzen and Bulck 
(2021: 182), these actors operate as propagandists, that is, “[t]heir end goal is to 
challenge and displace prevailing ideologies and manipulate/manage public opin-
ion towards conspiracy indoctrination”. Due to their “multiple online and offline 
platforms and revenue streams” (Turza 2023: 232), deplatforming conspiracy 
influencers becomes quite the challenge. Besides, since they are moved by finan-
cial incentives, there is no way of knowing whether such actors indeed believe the 
ideas they sell. In this sense, both Penã and Rose, as producers of content, may be 
included in this category of actors.
It is nevertheless important to distinguish the matter of effect from the notion 
of ‘intentionality’. I cannot know for sure what the intentions of Peña or Rose are 


278	
Heidi Campana Piva
with regard to the production and distribution of this video. I can, however, point 
to the possible social impacts of this discourse. What I aimed to do throughout 
this paper was to indicate the mechanisms through which meanings surrounding 
Climate Change were shaped by this video, and how they may lead to influencing 
the Model Reader’s behaviour (generate action) in a certain way.
As it was shown, such influencing happens through diverse ideologically 
in­vested discoursal practices that contribute to, in this case, sustaining power 
relations. Of course, power relations can be influenced in different ways (sus-
tained or undermined) by any kind of discourse, including scientific discourse. 
It is not something restricted to anti-scientific conspiracy theories. However, that 
“does not mean that all types of discourse are ideologically invested to the same 
degree” (Fairclough 1995: 82). I believe it is reasonable to affirm that this video 
was produced and distributed in a way that it contributes to sustaining power 
relations between: (a) the rich-and-powerful, who are generally seen as possess-
ing resources to tackle the climate issue, but refuse to take any action, and (b) the 
people who care about Climate Change and feel powerless to stop it in any direct 
way.
What can arguably be considered as the most obvious effect of the video is how 
it serves to influence the viewer’s perception of Climate Change as fictitious. Yet 
determining perceptions or imposing narratives are not ends in themselves – at 
least they are not what semioticians should be worried about – but rather ways in 
which “getting people to accept a particular narrative of the crisis [...] gives people 
a reason for favouring or accepting certain lines of action and policies rather than 
others” (Fairclough, Fairclough 2013: 4). The dangerous effect is thus not merely 
getting people to believe something, but getting them to act according to such 
belief.
In summary, explanatory narratives such as the ones supplied by conspiracy 
theories always encapsulate practical arguments, influencing processes of deci-
sion-making that have very real impacts on sociopolitical spheres (and, in case 
of Climate Change, on our biosphere as well). Thus, the significance of this dis-
course is in how Climate Change, as a crisis, is represented, explained, narrated, 
and interpreted as being a fraud, and how possible policy responses to it are, 
consequently, seen as scams. Throughout the video, many reasons are provided 
as to why people should not care about Climate Change, most of which can be 
assembled into the following list:
–	 The argument from individualism (Section 1.1): Holding other (powerful) 
people accountable is not adequate; the responsibility towards the world 
belongs to each individual alone.


	
Guiding interpretation towards deproblematization	
279
–	 The argument from expertise (Section 1.2): Reliable information sources (sci-
entists from the South/North Poles, MIT, CalTech, Scientific American, etc.) say 
that Climate Change is not real.
–	 The argument from nature (Section 2): We have had Climate Change for fifty, 
thirty thousand years; it is a natural occurrence.
–	 The argument from illegitimacy (Section 3): Journalists who spread false infor-
mation about Climate Change have not talked to any real experts.
–	 The snowflake argument (Section 3): Global Warming was invented by overly-
sensitive newer generations as something to complain about.
Accordingly, it is possible to state that, besides the obvious (getting people to 
believe Climate Change is a hoax), the underlying and most dangerous impact of 
this discourse is deproblematization, for it provides people with reasons to reject 
and abandon policies or plans for action that seek to mitigate the climate crisis in 
favour of other interests.
Conclusions
This paper has investigated a YouTube video interview with a Climate Change 
denier, with the aim of identifying the interpretative mechanisms of the discourse 
to which this text belongs (that is, the formal conditions that allow discourse to 
shape interpretation). For that, a qualitative empirical semiotic analysis was car-
ried out. Accordingly, this work has sought to examine the interplay between ideas 
and action, as well as belief and behaviour, pointing to the potential social effects 
of discourse.
Discourse is generated according to given perspectives and interests. In this 
sense, ideology – not just as a set of values/beliefs or encoded knowledge, but as a 
manipulation resource – can be understood as one of the primary meaning-mak-
ing mechanisms of anti-scientific discourse, being strategically applied to shape 
interpretation. Additionally, several discursive and signifying practices were iden-
tified as being instrumentalized in this text, namely: drawing from the viewer’s 
lack of contextual information, the focus falls on the answer being given instead 
of on the question; redirection of responsibility through a simple subject change; 
avoiding complete sentences and constructing a chaotic speech pattern (use of 
information fog), while repeating key elements to provide coherence; presentation 
of deductively valid arguments constructed from false premises; referencing insti-
tutions, societal actors, and organizations which are reliable information sources 
(background knowledge); revoking complexity (turning everything into simple 
essence without contradictions); and de-problematizing by appealing to nature.


280	
Heidi Campana Piva
As is typical of conspiracy theories, identity creation in the analysed discourse 
was shown to be strongly polarized, specifically based on two antagonistic rela-
tions of opposition: (1) a generational conflict, where ‘the newer generations’ are 
characterized as the enemy, and (2) a conflict surrounding legitimacy, where the 
journalists take the enemy role. In this second conflict, the identities of ‘us’ and 
‘them’ are constructed on the grounds of those who have the legitimate knowledge 
(“the real scientists”) and those who are spreading false information (the journal-
ists and the implied “fake scientists”). This discourse, thus, establishes an attitude 
with regards to science that is not of opposition, as one would expect. In this 
context, the fragmentation of Science (as a superstructure of society) into “real” vs 
“fake” science is pointed at here as being just as dangerous as the question of the 
loss of authority of the scientific community.
Overall, the code-text of the Climate Change conspiracy theory, as represented 
by the analysed video, can be translated as follows: Global Warming is a hoax 
that has been invented by newer generations, through worldwide acts of scientific 
and journalistic misconduct, to undermine the status quo. Even though this dis-
course seeks to delegitimize authority and mainstream knowledge, it is still pro-
establishment – it still serves to strengthen the power relations of the dominant 
regime – since it clearly advocates that things should be left as they are. Hence, the 
significance of this discourse lies in how Climate Change is represented as a fraud 
and, consequently, how possible policy responses to it are interpreted as scams. In 
conclusion, the underlying and most dangerous potential effect of this discourse 
is deproblematization.
Acknowledgements: The author would like to thank the University of Tartu, where 
this research was developed, for the financial support (Achievement stipend: doc-
tudeng-1016-01). The author is also grateful to Ott Puumeister and Mari-Liis Madisson 
from the Department of Semiotics of the University of Tartu, for providing crucial guid-
ance during the development of this work.
References
Adams, Paul 2022. “Not a big climate change guy”: Semiotic gradients and climate dis-
course. Environmental Communication 16(1): 79–91. https://doi.org/10.1080/175240
32.2021.1964998
Bakhtin, Mikhail 1986. Speech Genres and Other Late Essays. Austin: University of Texas 
Press.
Barthes, Roland 1973. Mythologies. London: Paladin.
Bergh, Jeroen van den 2010. An assessment of Lomborg’s The Skeptical Environmentalist 
and the ensuing debate. Journal of Integrative Environmental Sciences 7(1): 23–52. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/19438150903533730


	
Guiding interpretation towards deproblematization	
281
Bergmann, Eiríkur; Butter, Michael 2020. Conspiracy theory and populism. In: Butter, 
Michael; Knight, Peter (eds.), Routledge Handbook of Conspiracy Theories. New York: 
Routledge, 330–344. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429452734-3_6
Bergmann, Eiríkur; Dyrendal, Asbjørn; Harambam, Jaron; Thórisdóttir, Hulda 2020. 
Introduction. In: Butter, Michael; Knight, Peter (eds.), Routledge Handbook of Conspiracy 
Theories. New York: Routledge, 259–262. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429452734-3_0
Birchall, Clare 2006. Knowledge Goes Pop: From Conspiracy Theory to Gossip. Oxford: Berg 
Publishers. https://doi.org/10.26530/OAPEN_390769
Björnberg, Karin; Karlsson, Mikael; Gilek, Michael; Hansson, Sven 2017. Climate and 
environmental science denial: A review of the scientific literature published in 1990–
2015. Journal of Cleaner Production 167: 229–241. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro. 
2017.08.066
Butter, Michael; Knight, Peter 2020. Conspiracy theory in historical, cultural and literary 
studies. In: Butter, Michael; Knight, Peter (eds.), Routledge Handbook of Conspiracy 
Theories. New York: Routledge, 28–42. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429452734-1_2
Douglas, Karen; Uscinski, Joseph; Sutton, Robbie; Cichocka, Aleksandra; Nefes, Turkay; 
Siang Ang, Chee; Deravi, Farzin 2019. Understanding conspiracy theories. Political 
Psychology 40: 3–35, https://doi.org/10.1111/pops.12568
Fairclough, Norman 1995. Critical Discourse Analysis: The Critical Study of Language. 
London: Longman.
Fairclough, Isabela; Fairclough, Norman 2013. Political Discourse Analysis: A Method for 
Advanced Students. New York: Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203137888
Geertz, Clifford 1973. Thick description: Toward an interpretive theory of culture. In: The 
Interpretation of Cultures: Selected Essays. New York: Basic Books, 3–30.
Giry, Julien; Tika, Pranvera 2020. Conspiracy theories in political science and political 
theory. In: Butter, Michael; Knight, Peter (eds.), Routledge Handbook of Conspiracy 
Theories. New York: Routledge, 108–120. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429452734-1_8
Harambam, Jaron 2020. Conspiracy theory entrepreneurs, movements and individuals. In: 
Butter, Michael; Knight, Peter (eds.), Routledge Handbook of Conspiracy Theories. New 
York: Routledge, 278–291. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429452734-3_2
Hyzen, Aaron; Bulck, Hilde 2021. Conspiracies, ideological entrepreneurs, and digital 
popular culture. Media and Communication 9(3): 179–188. https://doi.org/10.17645/
mac.v9i3.4092
Jolley, Daniel; Douglas, Karen 2014. The social consequences of conspiracism: Exposure 
to conspiracy theories decreases intentions to engage in politics and to reduce one’s 
carbon footprint. British Journal of Psychology 105(1): 35–56. https://doi.org/10.1111/
bjop.12018
Keen, Steve 2021. The appallingly bad neoclassical economics of climate change. Revista 
de Economía Institucional 23(44): 13–52. https://doi.org/10.18601/01245996.v23n44.02
Kristeva, Julia 1980. Desire in Language: A Semiotic Approach to Literature and Art. New 
York: Columbia University Press.
Leone, Massimo 2016. Prefazione/Preface. In: Leone, Massimo (ed.), Complotto/Con­
spiracy. Monographic issue of Lexia. Rivista di semiotica 23(24): 55–67.
Leone, Massimo 2017. Fundamentalism, anomie, conspiracy: Umberto Eco’s semiot-
ics against interpretive irrationality. In: Thellefsen, Torkild; Sørensen, Bent (eds.), 


282	
Heidi Campana Piva
Umberto Eco in His Own Words. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 221–229. https://doi.
org/10.1515/9781501507144-027
Leone, Massimo; Madisson, Mari-Liis; Ventsel, Andreas 2020. Semiotic approaches to con-
spiracy theories. In: Butter, Michael; Knight, Peter (eds.), Routledge Handbook of Conspiracy 
Theories. New York: Routledge, 43–55. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429452734-1_3
Lewandowsky, Stephan; Gignac, Gilles; Oberauer, Klaus 2013. The role of conspiracist 
ideation and worldviews in predicting rejection of science. PloS One 8(10): e75637. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0134773
Madisson, Mari-Liis 2014. The semiotic logic of signification of conspiracy theories. 
Semiotica 202: 273–300. https://doi.org/10.1515/sem-2014-0059
Madisson, Mari-Liis; Ventsel, Andreas 2020. Strategic Conspiracy Narratives: A Semiotic 
Approach. New York: Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429020384
Nicholson, Rebecca 2016. “Poor little snowflake”  – the defining insult of 2016. The 
Guardian, 28. Nov.
Pirro, Andrea; Taggart, Paul 2023. Populists in power and conspiracy theories. Party 
Politics 29(3): 413–423. https://doi.org/10.1177/13540688221077071
Puumeister, Ott 2020. Conspiratorial rationality. Sign Systems Studies 48(2/4): 519–528. 
https://doi.org/10.12697/SSS.2020.48.2-4.15
Selg, Peeter; Ventsel, Andreas 2020. Introducing Relational Political Analysis: Political 
Semiotics as a Theory and Method. London: Palgrave MacMillan. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-48780-5
Sherwin, Brie 2021. Anatomy of a conspiracy theory: Law, politics, and science denialism 
in the era of COVID-19. Texas A&M Law Review 8: 537–581. https://doi.org/10.37419/
LR.V8.I3.3
Sonesson, Göran 1998. The concept of text in cultural semiotics. Sign Systems Studies 
26(1): 83–114. https://doi.org/10.12697/SSS.1998.26.04
Thórisdóttir, Hulda; Mari, Silvia; Krouwel, André 2020. Conspiracy theories, political 
ideology and political behaviour. In: Butter, Michael; Knight, Peter (eds.), Routledge 
Handbook of Conspiracy Theories. New York: Routledge, 304–316. https://doi.
org/10.4324/9780429452734-3_4
Turza, Lili 2023. Conspiracy entrepreneurs, fringe movements, and the pervasive style 
of conspiracy during the coronavirus pandemic. Covid Conspiracy Theories in Global 
Perspective. New York: Routledge, 221–235. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003330769-22
Uscinski, Joseph 2018. The study of conspiracy theories. Argumenta 6(32): 233–245. 
Uscinski, Joseph; Douglas, Karen; Lewandowsky, Stephan 2017. Climate change con-
spiracy theories. Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Climate Science, 26 Sept. https://doi.
org/10.1093/acrefore/9780190228620.013.328
Van Prooijen, Jan‐Willem; Rodrigues, Talia; Bunzel, Carlotta; Georgescu, Oana; Komá­
romy, Dániel; Krouwel, André 2022. Populist gullibility: Conspiracy theories, news 
credibility, bullshit receptivity, and paranormal belief. Political Psychology 43(6): 1061–
1079. https://doi.org/10.1111/pops.12802
Weigmann, Katrin 2018. The genesis of a conspiracy theory: Why do people believe in 
scientific conspiracy theories and how do they spread? EMBO reports 19(4): e45935. 
https://doi.org/10.15252/embr.201845935


	
Guiding interpretation towards deproblematization	
283
Interpretação Orientada Para Desproblematização: uma entrevista 
em vídeo com um negacionista climático analisada como teoria da 
conspiração
Desinformação sobre mudanças climáticas causa danos duradouros tanto às esferas socio-
políticas quanto à nossa própria biosfera. Assim, o presente artigo visa identificar os meca-
nismos de construção de sentido do discurso conspiratório acerca de mudanças climáticas 
em redes sociais, por meio da análise do vídeo do YouTube “Why I Said Global Warming 
is the Biggest Fraud in History”, que atingiu mais de 758 mil visualizações (maio 2023) 
antes do canal ser apagado (agosto 2023). Realizou-se uma análise semiótica empírica 
qualitativa com foco no discurso. Fundamentalmente, a negação das mudanças climáticas 
é entendida como teoria da conspiração, ou seja, um modo de interpretação. A narrativa 
conspiratória analisada cria identidades e molda as relações sociais na forma de oposi-
ções/conflitos dicotômicos entre os que espalham informações ilegítimas (o inimigo) e 
os que têm acesso à verdade (uma elite simbólica). Nesse contexto, a fragmentação da 
ciência em “real” e “falsa” é tão perigosa quanto a perda de autoridade da comunidade 
científica. Em conclusão, a importância deste vídeo está em como a mudança climática é 
representada como uma fraude e em como possíveis respostas políticas a ela são, portanto, 
representadas como golpes. O principal efeito desse discurso é a desproblematização, pois 
ele fornece motivos para que as pessoas rejeitem propostas de ações que buscam mitigar 
a crise climática.
Tõlgendamise suunamine probleemi eitamise poole. 
Konspiratsiooniteooriana analüüsitud videointervjuu kliimamuutuse 
eitajaga
Kliimamuutust puudutav desinformatsioon kahjustab püsivalt nii ühiskondlik-poliitilist 
sfääri kui ka meie eneste biosfääri. Käesolevas artiklis tuvastatakse kliimamuutust puudu-
tavate konspiratiivdiskursuste tähendusloomelisi mehhanisme sotsiaalmeedias, analüüsi-
des YouTube’i videot “Miks ma ütlesin, et globaalne soojenemine on kogu ajaloo suurim 
pettus” (Why I Said Global Warming is the Biggest Fraud in History), mis enne kanali sul-
gemist 2023. aasta augustis oli kogunud üle 758 tuhande vaatamise (mai 2023). Viidi läbi 
kvalitatiivne empiiriline semiootiline analüüs, mis keskendab diskursusele, milles kliima-
muutuse eitamist mõistetakse konspiratsiooniteooriana, see tähendab, tõlgenduslaadina. 
Analüüsitav konspiratsioonidiskursus loob identiteete ning kujundab sotsiaalseid suhteid 
illegitiimse informatsiooni jagajate (vaenlaste) ning tõele ligipääsu omajate (sümboolse 
eliidi) vaheliste dihhotoomsete opositsioonide/konfliktide näol. Selles kontekstis on tea-
duse killustumine “tõeliseks” ning “võltsituks” sama ohtlik kui teaduskogukonna autori-
teedi kadu. Antud video analüüsist nähtub, kuidas kliimamuutust kujutatakse pettusena 
ning kuidas võimalikke poliitilisi reaktsioone sellele kujutatakse seetõttu samuti pettusena. 
Sellise diskursuse peamine mõju on probleemi eitamine, sest see pakub inimestele põhjusi 
lükata tagasi ettepanekuid tegutsemiseks, mille eesmärgiks on kliimakriisi leevendamine.
