Longitudinal national evidence that social media use did not drive climate skepticism
and polarization in the 2010s
Helen Fischer1*, Markus Huff1,2, Chris G. Sibley3, Taciano L. Milfont4
1 IWM Tübingen, Germany. h.fischer@iwm-tuebingen.de
2 University of Tübingen, Germany. m.huff@iwm-tuebingen.de
3 University of Auckland, New Zealand. c.sibley@auckland.ac.nz
4 University of Waikato, New Zealand. taciano.milfont@waikato.ac.nz
*Correspondence: Helen Fischer, IWM Tübingen, Schleichstraße 6, 72076 Tübingen, 
Germany. h.fischer@iwm-tuebingen.de
Abstract
The global rise of social media has profoundly changed the ways in which citizens 
search for information; yet there is still uncertainty regarding the extent to which this societal 
transformation should be a cause for concern. One popular notion holds that the rise of social 
media in the 2010s contributed to the proliferation of climate skeptic and polarized beliefs. 
However, extant evidence relies predominantly on (repeated and one-shot) cross-sectional 
studies. Here, we leverage a longitudinal national panel survey unique to New Zealand that 
tracked social media use and climate change beliefs consistently among the same citizens 
(N=3.611) across four annual waves (2011-2014; wave-to-wave retention rates: > 80%). 
Results revealed that first, climate change belief trajectories were consistently positive 
(becoming less skeptical), regardless of whether citizens were Facebook users or non-users; 
speaking against the notion that social media use fostered climate skeptic beliefs. Second, 
Facebook users who were initially more skeptical tended to increase more in their climate 
change beliefs compared to Facebook users who were initially less skeptical; effectively 
reducing (vs. exacerbating) polarization. These results were robust for both beliefs in the 
reality, and the human cause of climate change; across different operationalizations of social 
media use; and held despite consistent evidence for the politicization of climate change in 
New Zealand during the study period. This evidence challenges the notion that the global rise
of social media in the 2010s exacerbated climate skepticism and polarization. 


 
Introduction  
Polarization and skepticism around climate change increased in many Western 
countries throughout the 2010s, stalling necessary mitigation and adaptation efforts 1–5. The 
origins of these skeptical and divisive beliefs are therefore the subject of ongoing debate. One
of the most prominent questions centers around the role of social media: Did the rise of social
media in the 2010s exacerbate skeptic and polarized climate beliefs? Although many studies 
have examined the relationship between social media use and climate beliefs, so far the 
extant results are largely inconsistent--with some studies finding positive, others negative, 
and yet others observing no relationship between social media use and climate beliefs6–8. 
However, one major caveat of existing evidence is that it relies predominantly on (one-shot 
and repeated) cross-sectional studies that assess different sets of individuals each wave, 
limiting their ability to elucidate the drivers of individual belief changes and belief 
polarization over time. This limitation is particularly pertinent to the early days of social 
media in the 2010s--a time characterized by both the rise of social media and increasing 
polarization of climate change--, but few studies assessed both phenomena simultaneously at 
the time. The present work contributes to the ongoing debate on the merits and dangers of 
social media use by leveraging a unique longitudinal panel survey among the New Zealand 
population that tracked social media use and climate change beliefs among the same 
individuals consistently across four waves from 2011 to 2014. This approach allows us to 
model the longitudinal relationship between social media use and climate change beliefs 
during the years of the simultaneous emergence of social media and the growing 
politicization of climate change. The present work, therefore, can help us answer the core 
question whether the global rise of social media in the early 2010s exacerbated climate 
skepticism and polarization. 
Throughout the 2010s, there was a noticeable increase in the politicization and 
polarization of climate change beliefs, especially in Western countries. To illustrate, there 
was a 22%-point difference between Democrats and Republicans in the USA regarding 
whether climate change was happening in 2010, and this increased into a 30-point difference 
by 20169. This pattern of polarization extended to other fundamental climate change beliefs, 
such as its human cause, and doubt and skepticism proliferated in some segments of the 
populace in other parts of the western world across the decade as well (for a review, see10). 


Alongside emerging political polarization in climate change beliefs, the 2010s were 
also characterized by a global shift in how citizens look for, and exchange information, due to
the rise of social media, particularly Facebook. Following the popularization of social media 
platforms at around 200811, Facebook was the most popular social media platform in the early
2010s by far, and it dominated the social media market for the entire decade 12,13. Its speed of 
diffusion was remarkable. While Facebook was used by less than 1 Million people per month 
at the beginning of the decade in 2011, the percentage of people using Facebook had grown 
to approximately 30% of the world population seven years later by 201814. Similar increases 
were observed for the time spent using Facebook: While US adults spent only 6 minutes on 
Facebook in 2010, this time had more than tripled to 21 minutes by 2014, only four years 
later15,16. 
To describe the effects of these profound and rapid changes in the global patterns of 
social media use and corresponding influence on citizens’ beliefs, current scholarship 
discusses three broad theoretical perspectives: Pessimistic, optimistic, and polarization 
accounts. First, the pessimistic account holds that social media confronts citizens with false 
content that reduces the factual accuracy of citizens’ beliefs (such as those about science in 
general or climate change in particular). Digital information environments confront citizens 
with considerable misinformation17, including outright disinformation18. In fact, some 
research describes online discourse as a breeding ground for misinformation17. The nature of 
digital information environments also makes it possible for false content to reach, and 
potentially affect, unprecedented numbers of people19, and lends itself to having highly 
selective conspiracist ideation appear socially accepted, which in turn may influence social 
media users’ attitudes and beliefs, including climate change beliefs20. In line with these 
effects of misinformation, the literature has documented a positive relationship between 
social media use and belief in misinformation for politicized science such as vaccination and 
COVID-1921,22, and some studies have similarly reported a negative relationship between 
social media engagement and climate change beliefs7,23. 
In contrast, the optimistic account holds that social media fosters egalitarian access to 
information and knowledge production, ultimately enabling an informed citizenship24. 
Optimistic accounts of social media stress that only a minority of Facebook users tend to 
cluster on homophilic networks of like-minded individuals25. Hence, through incidental 
exposure to information26, or interaction in mixed-attitude communities27, social media may 
confront citizens with uncongenial information. Supporting this optimistic account, citizens 
who were most likely to use the Internet showed the lowest levels of political polarization 


between 1996 and 201628. There is also some evidence supporting an optimistic account in 
the climate change domain, with some studies reporting positive relationships between 
Internet use and climate change beliefs, potentially because social media provides public 
access to scientific information8,29.
The third and final account holds that social media propels belief polarization in 
modern digital societies30,31. This polarization account argues that social media use does not 
uniformly affect the factual accuracy of beliefs. Rather, individual-level characteristics 
constraint the relationship between social media use and beliefs, thereby fueling belief 
polarization. Prior beliefs and political orientation, in particular, may moderate any potential 
effects of social media use32,33,33. A dominant cognitive mechanism behind the moderating 
effects of prior beliefs is motivated reasoning, reasoning that is desired to align with prior 
beliefs or a congenial conclusion (for a review, see34). Motivated reasoning effects have been 
demonstrated for the biased interpretation of climate change evidence as a function of prior 
beliefs35. Crucially, social media may reinforce motivated reasoning effects by enabling the 
selection of congenial content36,37, thereby strengthening existing beliefs. However, field 
experimental evidence testing the effects of exposure to congenial information on 
polarization by randomly assigning participants to subscribe to liberal or conservative 
information is inconclusive. One study found that exposure to counter-attitudinal news 
decreased negative attitudes toward the opposing political party38, one study using this 
approach found that messages from opposing political ideologies even increased political 
polarization39, and yet another recent large-scale field experiment found no effects of 
decreasing the exposure to like-minded news sources on polarization40. Supporting the 
polarization account in the area of climate change, online climate change discourse was found
to be increasingly polarized on Twitter41, but whether similar effects for belief polarization is 
little known. 
Although all three accounts are theoretically sound and there exist some empirical 
evidence supporting (and contradicting) each, extant research on the effects of media 
exposure on climate change beliefs relies predominantly on cross-sectional data6–8,32,43–45. This
is problematic because the theoretical reasoning underpinning each account implies a 
temporal examination of the relationship between social media use and climate change 
beliefs. Cross-sectional studies--both cross-sectional one-shot studies, as well as cross-
sectional longitudinal studies—are unable to inform how beliefs evolve within individuals, 
and what drives these changes. Furthermore, although some field experimental evidence 
exists on the relationship between social media use and polarization, this evidence stems 


exclusively from the domain of political news, and covers only comparatively short time 
frames of one week to a maximum of three months. The present work fills this research gap 
by leveraging longitudinal data that track the same individuals each year over a total of four 
years, thereby helping us to more reliably answer the core question of whether emerging 
social media use exacerbated skeptic and polarized climate beliefs in the 2010s. 
The present study
We tested the three competing accounts of social media use (pessimistic, optimistic, 
and polarization) in the 2010s, the years of the rise of social media. Leveraging longitudinal 
national data from the New Zealand Attitudes and Values survey (NZAVS), we describe the 
trajectory of how climate changes beliefs evolved among Facebook users and non-users over 
the course of four consecutive annual waves from 2011 to 2014. The NZAVS constitutes a 
longitudinal panel survey that tracks the same individuals consistently each year, allowing us 
to gain insights into how beliefs evolve within individuals over time. This feature 
distinguishes the NZAVS from repeated cross-sectional national surveys, which assess 
different sets of individuals in each wave. Furthermore, the sample was randomly drawn 
among all New Zealand adults registered to vote. This feature distinguishes the NZAVS from
non-probability sampling such as quota-matched samples that select participants based on a 
pre-specified and limited number of characteristics (such as age or gender). The present work
describes individual-level change in belief by harnessing latent growth curve models 
(LGCM), which simultaneously estimate initial levels of climate change beliefs (i.e.,  
intercept), their developmental trajectories over time (i.e., slope), and the correlation between
initial beliefs and belief trajectories (intercept-slope correlations). 
Pessimistic, optimistic, and polarization accounts make precise and distinguishable 
statistical predictions that can be tested with individual-level longitudinal data. Most 
informative in arbitrating between these theoretical accounts are slopes and intercept-slope 
correlations since these reveal individual overtime-change, and the group-based explanations
thereof. That is, in the present case, individual-level changes in climate change beliefs, 
explained by being a Facebook user or non-user. Specifically, (1) the pessimistic account 
predicts a negative growth rate of climate change beliefs (slope), that this rate of change in 
climate beliefs is stronger for Facebook users vs. non-users, and that the observed rate of 
change is largely independent of initial belief levels (intercept). In contrast, (2) the optimistic 
account predicts a positive growth rate of climate change beliefs (slope), that this rate of 
change is stronger for Facebook users vs. non-users, and that the rate of change is largely 


independent of initial belief levels (intercept). Finally, (3) the polarization account predicts 
that initial levels of climate change beliefs positively relate to rates of change (intercept-slope
correlation), such that citizens with higher initial levels of climate beliefs have more positive 
rates of change while citizens with lower initial levels of belief have more negative rates of 
change; a general phenomenon termed Matthew effect. Matthew effects, characterized by 
increasing disparities, have been observed in various social and cognitive phenomena, 
including reading skills, social inequality, and the development of news engagement on social
network sites38,39. If social media engagement drives disparate beliefs as a function of initial 
beliefs, these positive intercept-slope correlations should be stronger for Facebook users vs. 
non-users. 
Results
As per our pre-registered analysis plan, we conducted LGCMs to examine the initial 
levels and rates of change of climate change beliefs from 2011 to 2014 for Facebook users vs.
non-users. Specifically, we conducted two separate models, one for the belief in the reality of 
climate change and one for the belief in its human cause, employing Facebook use (yes/no) as
a grouping variable and including six demographical variables as covariates: age, gender 
(m/f), education (5-point ordinal rank), ethnicity (majority New Zealand European vs. all 
other), living in urban (vs. rural) areas, and political attitude (7-point scale; 1: liberal--7: 
conservative) (see Methods for details). While age, gender, education, ethnicity, and urban-
rural distinction were included in line with the NZAVS defaults, political attitude was 
included because of  rich literature on the relationship of political attitude and climate change
beliefs in many countries48,49  ,
Politicization of climate change beliefs. We first explored whether climate change 
beliefs were politicized in New Zealand at the time in the two models (reality and human 
cause of climate change). This was indeed the case in that both models revealed that political 
attitude negatively predicted climate change beliefs at each time point. Citizens who self-
identified as more conservative exhibited lower climate change beliefs, after adjusting for all 
co-variates (see Supplementary Material I).
Social media use and climate change beliefs: Facebook users vs. non-users. We 
next investigated intercept (initial level of climate change beliefs), slope (change trajectories 
of climate change beliefs), and intercept-slope correlations (correlation between initial levels 
and change trajectories) among Facebook users vs. non-users.
The estimated intercepts revealed initial climate change beliefs that were different 
from zero among both Facebook users and non-users. Intercepts were comparable among 


Facebook users (5.4, 95%CI [5.24, 5.56], p<.001) and non-users (5.2, 95%CI [5.0, 5.4], 
p<.001) for the belief that climate change is real, and comparable but stronger for the belief in
anthropogenic climate change among both Facebook users (4.77, 95%CI [4.60, 5.0], p<.001) 
and non-users (4.77, 95%CI [4.57, 4.97], p<.001). Hence, New Zealand citizens were 
predominantly more convinced than non-convinced in the reality of climate change and in its 
human cause, and this was the case for both Facebook users and non-users. 
Regarding slopes, the pessimistic account predicts more negative slopes for Facebook 
users vs. non-users; but this is not what we found. In contrast, the data revealed positive and 
highly similar slopes among both Facebook users and non-users for both climate change 
beliefs. This indicates that both Facebook users and non-users increased in their climate 
change beliefs over time, and did so at virtually indistinguishable rates. Specifically, the 
slopes for the belief that climate change is real were 0.09, 95%CI [0.04, 0.13], p<.001 among 
Facebook users, and 0.09, 95%CI [0.03, 0.15], p<.001 among non-users; and the slopes were 
0.12, 95%CI [0.08, 0.17], p<.001 among Facebook users, and 0.14, 95%CI [0.08, 0.20], 
p<.001 among non-users for the belief in its human causation. 
Regarding intercept-slopes correlations, polarization accounts predict positive 
intercept-slope correlations among Facebook users, such that citizens who are initially more 
skeptical become even more skeptical, and citizens who are initially more convinced become 
even more convinced. However, this is not what we found. Instead, the intercept-slope 
correlations were negative among both Facebook users and non-users, and highly similar 
between both groups. This was the case for both climate change beliefs. Specifically, the 
intercept-slope correlation was -.24, 95%CI [-.12, -.34], p<.001 among Facebook users and 
-.32, 95%CI [-.20, -.44], p<.001 among non-users for the belief in the reality of climate 
change, and these estimates were statistically comparable (χ2(1)=.8, p=.35). For the belief in 
anthropogenic climate change, the intercept-slope correlation was -.23, 95%CI [-.13, -.32], 
p<.001 among Facebook users and -.27, 95%CI [-.12, -.42], p<.001 among non-users, and 
again these estimates were statistically comparable (χ2(1)= 0.14, p=.71). These results reveal 
compensatory growth patterns among both Facebook users and non-users, where citizens 
with initially high beliefs grow less in their climate change beliefs, whereas initially more 
skeptical citizens grow more; thereby effectively reducing (vs. exacerbating) polarization.
Social media use and climate change beliefs: Hours spent using Facebook. 
Extending our pre-registered analytical plan, we also considered hours spent using Facebook 
as an alternative measure of social media use, and to test the robustness and generalizability 


of our findings. We conducted the same LGCMs outlined above, replacing the binary 
indicator of Facebook use vs. non-use with hours spent using Facebook. We included time 
spent on Facebook assessed at baseline (time 1) as a time-invariant predictor; consistent with 
the group-specific results. That is, instead of a two-group model separating Facebook users 
vs. non-users, we now ran a one-group model using hours spent using Facebook as a 
continuous predictor. The sample size was N=3.414 citizens for this model (see Appendix 2 
for model details). 
Results largely confirmed the group-specific results for Facebook users vs. non-users, 
and contradicted the pessimistic and polarization account of social media use. For both 
climate change beliefs (reality and human cause), we found a negative predictivity of political
attitude at each wave, as well as negative intercept-slope correlations; confirming both the 
politicization of climate change in New Zealand at the time, and the compensatory growth 
patterns of climate change beliefs over time. Most importantly, the model revealed that hours 
spent using Facebook were unrelated to the over-time development (slope) of the belief that 
climate change is anthropogenic, and slightly positively related to the over-time development 
(slope) that climate change is real. Hence, hours spent on Facebook at baseline predicted 
positive belief trajectories such that citizens spending more time on Facebook become more 
convinced of the reality of climate change in subsequent years; accounting for baseline 
differences in belief and all model co-variates. 
Discussion
The global rise of social media in the 2010s has profoundly and rapidly changed the 
ways in which citizens communicate and search for information, prompting ongoing debates 
around the merits and dangers of social media engagement50,51. Leveraging a large 
longitudinal data set that consistently tracked the same individuals across four consecutive 
years in the early 2010s, the present work offers two key insights. First, we did not find 
evidence that social media use inherently fostered climate skeptic beliefs. Instead, belief 
trajectories were consistently positive among both Facebook users and non-users even after 
accounting for baseline differences in beliefs, demographics and political attitude. Second, in 
contrast to our expectation and common concerns, we did not find evidence that social media 
use exacerbated polarization of climate change beliefs. Instead, initial climate beliefs and 
individual belief trajectories were negatively correlated. These compensatory growth patterns 
indicate that Facebook users who were initially climate skeptic tended to increase more in 
their climate change beliefs compared to Facebook users who were initially less skeptic; 


effectively reducing (vs. exacerbating) polarization. These results were consistent for beliefs 
in the reality of climate change and its human cause; and held despite the concurrent 
politicization of climate change beliefs in New Zealand during the study period. The present 
results, therefore, challenge the popular notion that the global rise of social media in the 
2010s exacerbated climate skepticism and polarization, shedding light on the nuanced 
relationship between social media use and the phenomenon of polarized and skeptical climate
beliefs in Western countries. 
Increasing polarization over politicized topics such as climate change is frequently 
attributed to the presence of echo chambers on social media31,52, for a review, see30. Echo 
chambers facilitate the immersion of individuals in like-minded communities, where they 
may predominantly consume content that aligns with their existing beliefs. While the 
existence of echo chambers is well-documented40, there remains uncertainty regarding their 
actual effects. A common concern is that social media engagement may foster belief 
polarization due to this pervasive access to belief-consistent information30,31. Polarizing 
accounts predict a Matthew effect, wherein initially more skeptic citizens tend to become 
more skeptical over time, whereas initially more convinced citizens tend to become more 
convinced46,47. 
However, the present data leveraging Latent Growth Curve models based on 
comprehensive national data, revealed a different pattern: Negative intercept-slope 
correlations indicating compensatory growth. This finding implies that disparities in climate 
change beliefs among Facebook users were effectively reduced, rather than polarized. These 
results align with recent experimental evidence suggesting that motivated reasoning only 
rarely leads to polarized belief updating53. Furthermore, the results also align with recent field
experimental evidence demonstrating that, even though citizens are indeed regularly exposed 
to congenial content from like-minded sources on social media, this might not in fact 
exacerbate polarization40. 
In addition to a large sample size of > 3.500 citizens which provides statistical power 
to detect even subtle effects of social media use (if they exist), we conducted our analyses 
utilizing two distinct operationalizations of Facebook use. The first was one binary variable 
indexing the presence of a Facebook profile, and the second was one continuous variable 
assessing the amount of time spent on Facebook. Notably, while this later continuous 
measure affords detecting even smaller effects of social media use, results were largely in 
line with results from the group-wise comparison. In fact, if anything, continuous results 
highlighted a specific positive effect of Facebook use: Citizens who indicated spending more 


(vs. less) time using Facebook at baseline became more convinced of the reality of climate 
change over the subsequent years. 
Research has now amassed a substantial evidence base on the effects of social media 
use that delivers important insights into the effects of contemporary information technology 
on public polarization (for a review, see51). However, it is important to acknowledge that 
existing evidence may be skewed due to an over-reliance on data from specific countries even
within the Western world, primarily the United States and certain European countries, as well
as cross-sectional studies. In this work, we address both limitations by drawing upon a 
national longitudinal sample from New Zealand, a Western country typically 
underrepresented in large-scale overviews. Our research aims to contribute to diversifying 
our knowledge base and, consequently, offering more globally representative estimates of 
effect sizes. This endeavor is crucial for informing scientific, political, and societal 
discussions surrounding the potential impacts of social media on polarization phenomena 
worldwide.
The present results, of course, cannot provide a definitive answer to the effects of 
social media use on polarized and skeptical climate change beliefs. First, results covered the 
“early days” of social media and hence cannot speak to the effects of social media at later 
time points. In particular, these results do not rule out that mis- and disinformation on social 
media has become more prevalent on social media over time, or may exert stronger effects 
nowadays (but see40,54). Second, the present data covered a longitudinal time frame of four 
years, and hence cannot rule out the possibility that information consumption via social 
media takes more time to exert notable effects on beliefs. Third, the present data covered only
a single social media platform, Facebook. While this was the dominant social media platform 
across the entire decade of the 2010s, we cannot rule out that the use of other social media 
platforms exert effects other than the ones described here. Fourth, the present data are 
representative of one Western and anglophone country, and therefore do not necessarily 
generalize to other countries or cultural contexts, especially not outside the English-speaking 
world. And lastly, the present work relies on self-reports of social media use rather than 
objective web tracking data, which may allow differentiating the effects of different 
journalistic techniques 55. 
Given the myriad ways in which beliefs can change, and be changed, over time, 
especially within the context of large-scale societal transformations, longitudinal data that 
examine the intricate relationships between these transformations and individual-level belief 
dynamics are particularly insightful. The findings from the present study, which tracked 


individual climate change beliefs and social media engagement over a span of four years, do 
not lend support to pessimistic and polarizing accounts of social media; despite overall 
consistent evidence for the politicization of climate change in New Zealand at the time. These
results suggest that social media do not inherently contribute to belief polarization, even on 
politicized topics. In conclusion, the present work challenges the notion that the global rise of
social media use exacerbated the proliferation of climate skeptic and polarized beliefs during 
the 2010s.
Method
Transparency and Openness. Preregistration of hypotheses and analysis plan are 
available under: https://osf.io/e96bp.  The Mplus syntax used to test all models reported in 
this manuscript is available under:  
https://files.osf.io/v1/resources/75snb/providers/osfstorage/6515ffeb333aef03ead70a4c/?zip=
More information about the NZAVS is available under: https://osf.io/75snb/.  The data 
described in the paper are part of the New Zealand Attitudes and Values Study (NZAVS). 
Full copies of the NZAVS data files are held by all members of the NZAVS management 
team and advisory board. A de-identified dataset containing the variables analysed in this 
manuscript is available upon request from Chris Sibley (c.sibley@auckland.ac.nz), or any 
member of the NZAVS advisory board for the purposes of replication or checking of any 
published study using NZAVS data. The NZAVS project is reviewed every three years by the
University of Auckland Human Ethics committee.
Sample
We analyzed waves 3-6 (years 2011-2014) of the New Zealand Attitudes and Values 
Study (NZAVS), all waves for which social media use was assessed. The NZAVS is a 
longitudinal national study unique to New Zealand. It encompasses a national probability 
sample of New Zealand adults with an average retention rate of approx. 80% from year to 
year. At wave 1, a random sample of 40,500 New Zealand citizens (~1.4 of all citizens 
registered to vote) was invited for the sample via postal questionnaires, which yielded 6.518 
participants (response rate: ~17%). The sample was drawn via a stratified random procedure 
that first randomly selected unique households based on postal addresses, and then randomly 
selected one citizen per household. Retention rates from the respective previous years for the 
waves covered in this study were:  81.5% for wave 6 from wave 5; 80.8% for wave 5 from 
wave 4; and 83.7% for wave 4 from wave 3. 
In the present study, participants were included when they completed all four waves 
(2011-2014), yielding a final sample size of N=3.611 citizens. Of the final sample, n=2,108 


(58%) indicated having a Facebook profile at baseline, and n=1,503 (42%) indicated not have
a Facebook profile at baseline. This proportion of Facebook users is highly consistent with 
other western countries at the time. For example, 53% of the population of the USA reported 
using social media in 201156. 
Measures
Climate change beliefs. Two questions assessed climate change belief, one assessing 
beliefs in the reality of climate change (“Climate change is real”), and one assessing belief in 
the anthropogenic nature of climate change (“Climate change is caused by humans”), each 
answered on a 7-point scale ranging from 1 (strongly agree) to 7 (strongly disagree).
Social media use. Social media use is assessed using two questions, one open-ended 
quantitative variable assessing the “Hours spent using Facebook”, and one question on 
Facebook profile: “Do you have a Facebook profile?” (yes/no). Citizens were coded as 
belonging to the group of Facebook users when they indicated having a Facebook profile at 
time 1. 
Co-variates. Our list of pre-registered co-variates included: Political attitude that 
participants indicated on a scale from 1 (very liberal) to 7 (very conservative); Gender (coded
as 0=male; 1=female), age, education (Legacy Education Variable; centered, coded as: -2: 
none/unreported; -1: Some High School; 0= Diploma/Certificate; 1=Undergraduate; 2= Post-
Graduate), Ethnicity (coded as 1= majority New Zealand European; 0= all other), and urban-
rural distinction (coded as urban=1; rural =0). 
Analytical Approach
To estimate the longitudinal relationship between Facebook-use and climate change 
beliefs, we estimated latent growth curve models using Mplus version 8.8. Latent growth 
curve models (LGCM) allow us to describe the average rate of change within individuals 
over time. Specifically, this technique allows us to estimate initial climate change beliefs (i.e.,
intercept) and their developmental trajectories over time (i.e., slope). The LGCM models 
single individuals’ growth trajectories over time. The parameters of individual growth curves 
can be used to test the importance of predictors of individual differences; allowing us to 
answer questions about whether Facebook use explains differences in rates of belief change57.
In line with our preregistered analysis plan, we ran multi-group models (Facebook 
users and non-users), separately for the reality and the anthropogenicity of climate change, 
assuming linear change in belief over time; and including a preregistered list of co-variates 
(age, gender, ethnicity, political attitude, education, urban-rural distinction). Specifically, 


Gender, age, education, ethnicity and urban-rural distinction were included as time-invariant 
predictors; political attitude was included as a time-variant predictor. All continuous 
predictors (age, political attitude) were centered using grandmean centering.
To compare the size of the intercept-slope correlation between users and non-users, 
we used univariate Wald tests of parameter constraint. All models used maximum likelihood 
with robust estimation of standard errors. The LGCMs fit the data well for both the climate 
reality (Chi-square=9.122(84), p<.001, χ2/df=.11, RMSEA=.063, 95%CI[.057, .068], 
CFI=.96) and its human cause (Chi-square=10.924(84), p<.001, χ2/df=.13, RMSEA=.061, 
95%CI[.056, .067], CFI=.97).
Funding statement.  The New Zealand Attitudes and Values Study is funded by a 
grant from the Templeton Religion Trust (TRT-2021-10418).
Competing Interests statement. All authors declare no competing interests. 


Literature
1. Farrell, J. Corporate funding and ideological polarization about climate change. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113, 92–97 (2016).
2. Kennedy, B. & Johnson, C. More Americans see climate change as a priority, but 
Democrats are much more concerned than Republicans. (2020).
3. Lucas, C. H. Concerning values: what underlies public polarisation about climate change? 
Geographical Research 56, 298–310 (2018).
4. Marlon, J. et al. Younger Americans are growing more worried about global warming. 
New Haven, CT: Yale Program on Climate Change Communication (2022).
5. Dunlap, R. E., McCright, A. M. & Yarosh, J. H. The political divide on climate change: 
Partisan polarization widens in the US. Environment: Science and Policy for Sustainable 
Development 58, 4–23 (2016).
6. Anderson, A. A. Effects of social media use on climate change opinion, knowledge, and 
behavior. in Oxford research encyclopedia of climate science (2017).
7. Tingley, D. & Wagner, G. Solar geoengineering and the chemtrails conspiracy on social 
media. Palgrave Communications 3, 1–7 (2017).
8. Zhao, X. Media use and global warming perceptions: A snapshot of the reinforcing spirals.
Communication Research 36, 698–723 (2009).
9. Americans Who Accept Climate Change Outnumber Those Who Don’t 5 to 1. Yale E360 
https://e360.yale.edu/digest/americans-who-accept-climate-change-outnumber-those-who-
dont-5-to-1.
10.
Capstick, S., Whitmarsh, L., Poortinga, W., Pidgeon, N. & Upham, P. International 
trends in public perceptions of climate change over the past quarter century. Wiley 
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change 6, 35–61 (2015).
11.
Vuorre, M. & Przybylski, A. K. Estimating the association between Facebook 
adoption and well-being in 72 countries. Royal Society Open Science 10, 221451 (2023).
12.
Our World in Data. The rise of social media. Our World in Data 
https://ourworldindata.org/rise-of-social-media.


13.
Moreno, K. The Evolution of Social Media Over a Decade (2010-2020). Zoetica 
Media https://www.zoeticamedia.com/the-evolution-of-social-media-over-a-decade 
(2020).
14.
Perrin, A. Social Media Usage: 2005-2015. Pew Research Center: Internet, Science &
Tech https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2015/10/08/social-networking-usage-2005-
2015/ (2015).
15.
Global daily social media usage 2023. Statista 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/433871/daily-social-media-usage-worldwide/.
16.
Gupta, A. Facebook Inc. (FB) Attracts 10% Of Digital Ad Spends From Just 6% Of 
Digital Time Spent In US. Dazeinfo https://dazeinfo.com/2014/09/19/facebook-inc-fb-
digital-ad-spendings-time-spent-us-social-media/ (2014).
17.
Treen, K. M. d’I, Williams, H. T. & O’Neill, S. J. Online misinformation about 
climate change. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change 11, e665 (2020).
18.
Lewandowsky, S. Climate Change Disinformation and How to Combat It. Annual 
Review of Public Health 42, 1–21 (2021).
19.
Vosoughi, S., Roy, D. & Aral, S. The spread of true and false news online. Science 
359, 1146–1151 (2018).
20.
Lewandowsky, S., Cook, J., Fay, N. & Gignac, G. E. Science by social media: 
Attitudes towards climate change are mediated by perceived social consensus. Memory & 
cognition 47, 1445–1456 (2019).
21.
Jamieson, K. H. & Albarracin, D. The Relation between Media Consumption and 
Misinformation at the Outset of the SARS-CoV-2 Pandemic in the US. The Harvard 
Kennedy School Misinformation Review (2020).
22.
Stecula, D. A. & Pickup, M. Social media, cognitive reflection, and conspiracy 
beliefs. Frontiers in Political Science 3, 62 (2021).
23.
Taddicken, M. & Reif, A. Who participates in the climate change online discourse? A 
typology of Germans’ online engagement. Communications 41, 315–337 (2016).
24.
Rishel, N. M. Digitizing deliberation: Normative concerns for the use of social media 
in deliberative democracy. Administrative Theory & Praxis 33, 411–432 (2011).


25.
Pew Research Center. Political content on social media: What Americans see, discuss 
or post. Pew Research Center: Internet, Science & Tech 
https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2016/10/25/political-content-on-social-media/ 
(2016).
26.
Fletcher, R. & Nielsen, R. K. Are people incidentally exposed to news on social 
media? A comparative analysis. New media & society 20, 2450–2468 (2018).
27.
Williams, H. T., McMurray, J. R., Kurz, T. & Lambert, F. H. Network analysis 
reveals open forums and echo chambers in social media discussions of climate change. 
Global environmental change 32, 126–138 (2015).
28.
Boxell, L., Gentzkow, M. & Shapiro, J. M. Greater Internet use is not associated with 
faster growth in political polarization among US demographic groups. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 114, 10612–10617 (2017).
29.
Climate change - October 2011 - - Eurobarometer survey. 
https://europa.eu/eurobarometer/surveys/detail/1007.
30.
Van Bavel, J. J., Rathje, S., Harris, E., Robertson, C. & Sternisko, A. How social 
media shapes polarization. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 25, 913–916 (2021).
31.
Sunstein, C. #Republic: Divided Democracy in the Age of Social Media. (Princeton 
University Press, 2018). doi:10.1515/9781400890521.
32.
Diehl, T., Huber, B., Gil de Zúñiga, H. & Liu, J. Social media and beliefs about 
climate change: A cross-national analysis of news use, political ideology, and trust in 
science. International Journal of Public Opinion Research 33, 197–213 (2021).
33.
Hornsey, M. J. Why Facts Are Not Enough: Understanding and Managing the 
Motivated Rejection of Science. Current Directions in Psychological Science 29, 583–591
(2020).
34.
Fischer, H. & van den Broek, K. Climate change knowledge, meta-knowledge and 
beliefs. in Research Handbook on Environmental Sociology (Edward Elgar Publishing, 
2021).
35.
Said, N., Fischer, H. & Anders, G. Contested science: Individuals with higher 
metacognitive insight into interpretation of evidence are less likely to polarize. 


Psychonomic bulletin & review 1–13 (2021).
36.
Brenes Peralta, C., Wojcieszak, M., Lelkes, Y. & de Vreese, C. Selective exposure to 
balanced content and evidence type: The case of issue and non-issue publics about climate 
change and health care. Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly 94, 833–861 
(2017).
37.
Weeks, B. E., Lane, D. S., Kim, D. H., Lee, S. S. & Kwak, N. Incidental exposure, 
selective exposure, and political information sharing: Integrating online exposure patterns 
and expression on social media. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 22, 363–
379 (2017).
38.
Levy, R. Social media, news consumption, and polarization: Evidence from a field 
experiment. American economic review 111, 831–870 (2021).
39.
Bail, C. A. et al. Exposure to opposing views on social media can increase political 
polarization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 115, 9216–9221 (2018).
40.
Nyhan, B. et al. Like-minded sources on Facebook are prevalent but not polarizing. 
Nature 1–8 (2023).
41.
Tyagi, A., Uyheng, J. & Carley, K. M. Affective polarization in online climate change
discourse on twitter. in 2020 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social 
Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM) 443–447 (IEEE, 2020).
42.
Falkenberg, M. et al. Growing polarization around climate change on social media. 
Nature Climate Change 12, 1114–1121 (2022).
43.
Carmichael, J. T. & Brulle, R. J. Media use and climate change concern. International
Journal of Media & Cultural Politics 14, 243–253 (2018).
44.
Elias, T., Blaine, M., Morrison, D. & Harris, B. Media Use, Cross-National Samples, 
and the Theory of Planned Behavior: Implications for Climate Change Advocacy 
Intentions. International Journal of Communication 13, 25 (2019).
45.
Newman, T. P., Nisbet, E. C. & Nisbet, M. C. Climate change, cultural cognition, and
media effects: Worldviews drive news selectivity, biased processing, and polarized 
attitudes. Public Understanding of Science 27, 985–1002 (2018).
46.
Kümpel, A. S. The Matthew Effect in social media news use: Assessing inequalities 


in news exposure and news engagement on social network sites (SNS). Journalism 21, 
1083–1098 (2020).
47.
S\lomczyński, K. M. & Janicka, K. Polarized social-class structure: On the Matthew 
effect and increasing inequality. Polish sociological review 164, 341–358 (2008).
48.
Fischer, H. & Said, N. Importance of domain-specific metacognition for explaining 
beliefs about politicized science: The case of climate change. Cognition 208, 104545 
(2020).
49.
Hornsey, M. J. The role of worldviews in shaping how people appraise climate 
change. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 42, 36–41 (2021).
50.
Orben, A. & Przybylski, A. K. The association between adolescent well-being and 
digital technology use. Nature human behaviour 3, 173–182 (2019).
51.
Lorenz-Spreen, P., Oswald, L., Lewandowsky, S. & Hertwig, R. A systematic review 
of worldwide causal and correlational evidence on digital media and democracy. Nature 
human behaviour 7, 74–101 (2023).
52.
Iyengar, S., Lelkes, Y., Levendusky, M., Malhotra, N. & Westwood, S. J. The Origins
and Consequences of Affective Polarization in the United States. Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 22, 
129–146 (2019).
53.
Fischer, H., Huff, M. & Said, N. Polarized climate change beliefs: No evidence for 
science literacy driving motivated reasoning in a US national study. American 
Psychologist (2022).
54.
Guess, A., Nagler, J. & Tucker, J. Less than you think: Prevalence and predictors of 
fake news dissemination on Facebook. Science advances 5, eaau4586 (2019).
55.
Schmidt, A. L. et al. Measuring social response to different journalistic techniques on 
Facebook. Humanities and Social Sciences Communications 7, (2020).
56.
U.S. population social media penetration 2021. Statista 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/273476/percentage-of-us-population-with-a-social-
network-profile/.
57.
Duncan, T. E. & Duncan, S. C. The ABC’s of LGM: An Introductory Guide to Latent 
Variable Growth Curve Modeling: The ABC’s of LGM. Social and Personality 


Psychology Compass 3, 979–991 (2009).


Supplementary Material I: Politicization of climate change in two separate LGC models
Climate change beliefs were politicized in our main LGC models predicting the initial levels 
and rates of change of climate change beliefs from 2011 to 2014 for Facebook users vs. non-
users in two separate models (reality of climate change and its human cause), employing 
Facebook use (yes/no) as a grouping variable; and including age, gender (m/f), education (5-
point ordinal rank), ethnicity (majority New Zealand European vs. all other), urban-rural 
distinction, and political attitude (7-point scale; 1: liberal--7: conservative) as covariates. 
Associations between political attitude and climate change beliefs were negative overall. 
Specifically, for the belief that climate change is real, associations were as follows. Time 1: 
r(2106)FB=-.10,  p<.001, r(1501)non-FB=-.12, p=.2; time 2: r(2106)FB=-.08,  p<.001, r(1501)non-
FB=-.13, p=.08; time 3: r(2106)FB=-.12, r(1501)non-FB=-.13, p<.001; time 4: r(2106)FB=-.13, 
r(1501)non-FB=-.10,  p<.001).
For the belief that climate change is human caused, associations were as follows. 
Time 1: r(2106)FB=-.06, p<.001, r(1501)non-FB=-.02, p=.2; time 2: r(2106)FB=-.07,  p<.001, 
r(1501)non-FB=-.03, p=.08;  time 3: r(2106)FB=-.09, r(1501)non-FB=-.10, p<.001; time 4: 
r(2106)FB=-.10, r(1501)non-FB=-.10,  p<.001). 


Supplementary Material 2: One-group LGC model
As a supplementary analysis to the two-group LGC model (Facebook users vs. non-
users), we conducted one-group models by replacing the binary indicator of Facebook use vs.
non-use with hours spent using Facebook, again separately for beliefs in the reality of climate
change and its human cause. We included time spent on Facebook assessed at baseline (time 
1) as a time-invariant predictor; consistent with the group-specific results. We used the same 
set of co-variates as in the group-based model, that is, age, gender (m/f), education (5-point 
ordinal rank), ethnicity (majority New Zealand European vs. all other), urban-rural 
distinction, and political attitude (7-point scale; 1: liberal--7: conservative). Again, all 
continuous predictors were centered (using grandmean centering), that is, age, hours spent 
using facebook, and political attitude. Participants were included when they had completed 
all four waves, yielding a sample size of N=3.516. Both models fit the data well. Fit indices 
for model predicting beliefs in the human cause of climate change: RMSEA= 0.06, CFI=.97, 
Chi-square=10.722(46), p<.001; Fit indices for models predicting the reality of climate 
change:  RMSEA= 0.06, CFI=.96, Chi-square=8903(46), p<.001.
In line with results from the group-based model, we did not find evidence to support 
that social media use fostered climate change polarization. Rather, intercept-slope 
correlations were negative. This was the case for both climate change beliefs. Specifically, 
the intercept-slope correlation was -.28, 95%CI [-.20, -.37], p<.001 for the belief in the reality
of climate change, and  -.24, 95%CI [-.16, -.32], p<.001 for belief in its human cause.
Furthermore, time spent using Facebook at baseline predicted slightly higher positive 
slopes for the belief that climate change is real, 0.004 95%CI [.001, .007]; but did not predict 
slopes for beliefs in the human cause of climate change, 0.001 95%CI [-.002, -.004].
