Unay-Gailhard, İlkay; Lawson, Kati; Brennan, Mark A.
Article  —  Published Version
An examination of digital empathy: When farmers speak
for the climate through TikTok
Journal of Rural Studies
Provided in Cooperation with:
Leibniz Institute of Agricultural Development in Transition Economies (IAMO), Halle (Saale)
Suggested Citation: Unay-Gailhard, İlkay; Lawson, Kati; Brennan, Mark A. (2023) : An examination of
digital empathy: When farmers speak for the climate through TikTok, Journal of Rural Studies, ISSN
1873-1392, Elsevier, New York, Vol. 102, pp. --,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2023.103075 ,
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0743016723001419
This Version is available at:
https://hdl.handle.net/10419/274076
Standard-Nutzungsbedingungen:
Die Dokumente auf EconStor dürfen zu eigenen wissenschaftlichen
Zwecken und zum Privatgebrauch gespeichert und kopiert werden.
Sie dürfen die Dokumente nicht für öffentliche oder kommerzielle
Zwecke vervielfältigen, öffentlich ausstellen, öffentlich zugänglich
machen, vertreiben oder anderweitig nutzen.
Sofern die Verfasser die Dokumente unter Open-Content-Lizenzen
(insbesondere CC-Lizenzen) zur Verfügung gestellt haben sollten,
gelten abweichend von diesen Nutzungsbedingungen die in der dort
genannten Lizenz gewährten Nutzungsrechte.
Terms of use:
Documents in EconStor may be saved and copied for your personal
and scholarly purposes.
You are not to copy documents for public or commercial purposes, to
exhibit the documents publicly, to make them publicly available on the
internet, or to distribute or otherwise use the documents in public.
If the documents have been made available under an Open Content
Licence (especially Creative Commons Licences), you may exercise
further usage rights as specified in the indicated licence.
  http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/


Journal of Rural Studies 102 (2023) 103075
Available online 14 August 2023
0743-0167/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
An examination of digital empathy: When farmers speak for the climate 
through TikTok 
˙Ilkay Unay-Gailhard a,b,*, Kati Lawson c, Mark A. Brennan d 
a UNESCO Community, Leadership, and Youth Development The Pennsylvania State University (PSU) 307 Armsby Building, 16802, University Park, PA, USA 
b Leibniz Institute of Agricultural Development in Transition Economies (IAMO) Theodor-Lieser-Str. 2, D-06120, Halle (Saale), Germany 
c University of Florida; Department of Agricultural Education and Communication (AEC); 1200 North Park Road; Plant City, FL, 33563, USA 
d UNESCO Community, Leadership, and Youth Development; The Pennsylvania State University (PSU); 204C Ferguson Building, 16802, University Park, PA, USA   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Digital empathy 
Young farmers 
Online dialogue engagement 
Climate change dialogue 
Food system communication 
TikTok 
UN COP26 
A B S T R A C T   
Food production contributes to and is affected by climate change. With this dual-sided nature of food production, 
separate from policymakers, the media, scientists, and activists, how climate dialogue engagement occurs when 
farmers speak about climate is the interest of this research. Due to the important role of youth in climate 
activism, we analyze climate dialogue engagement on the youthful platform of TikTok during the most recent 
United Nations COP26 meeting, when climate dialogues peaked globally in the media. This study includes a two- 
step analyses: Step-I involved a post-focused analysis investigating digital empathy surrounding TikTok posts 
created by farmers. Step-II was a user-focused analysis exploring TikTok farmers’ perspectives on the public 
engagement with their climate-farming related posts. The results suggest that the typical empathic engagement 
of the analyzed climate dialogue is emotional reactions (expressed briefly or explicitly). Even though the 
analyzed videos contain alternative ways of communication (dynamic demonstrations, humor), cognitive 
empathy can differ based on the narrative and narrator. These findings contribute to studies investigating the 
outcome of climate communication among communities that share specific interests, elaborating on the role of 
alternative ways of communication in climate dialogues, and exploring how digital empathy serves to break 
down self-silencing among farmers and the online communities that they reach out to.   
1. Introduction 
Food production contributes to and is affected by global climate 
change. Both animal and plant-based foods are sources of greenhouse 
gas emissions that contribute to global household emissions (Crippa 
et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2021). At the same time, the effects of climate 
change present a significant threat to food production through a 
reduction in crop and livestock productivity, as well as soil and water 
quality and quantity (Hatfield et al., 2011). 
This dual-sided nature of food production puts farmers at the central 
point of climate dialogues, which is mainly headed by the media, sci­
entists, policy makers, and activists. One side of the climate dialogues is 
focused on the contribution of food production to global climate change, 
where farmers are receivers of information about how to build practical 
improvements on farms and build new relationships with consumers and 
citizens (van der Ploeg, 2020). The majority of communications 
engagement surrounding the climate impact of food production occurs 
at both the social and political level. Apart from global political meet­
ings (e.g., United Nations Climate Change Conferences), there are high 
levels of social and media interactions where groups such as activists 
and creators of social movements coordinate actions to create commu­
nity social capital. These dialogues are mainly aimed at promoting the 
environmental benefits of reducing livestock farming, clearing land for 
grazing, and decreasing other agriculture related activities that have a 
high share of global emissions, such as food processing, transport, retail, 
and packaging. 
On the other side of the climate dialogues surrounding how food 
production is affected by global climate change, farmers are again re­
ceivers of information about the threats due to uncertainty, the expected 
risks associated with climate change, and how the adoption of new farm 
management practices can help to deal with the negative effects of 
climate change (Sorvali et al., 2021; Bavorov´a et al., 2020). The 
* Corresponding author. UNESCO Community, Leadership, and Youth Development The Pennsylvania State University (PSU) 307 Armsby Building, 16802, 
University Park, PA, USA. 
E-mail addresses: unaygailhard@iamo.de (˙I. Unay-Gailhard), katilawson@ufl.edu (K. Lawson), mab187@psu.edu (M.A. Brennan).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Journal of Rural Studies 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jrurstud 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2023.103075 
Received 19 March 2023; Received in revised form 22 June 2023; Accepted 3 August 2023   


Journal of Rural Studies 102 (2023) 103075
2
communications engagement on the risks of climate change on food 
production includes some communications challenges (between scien­
tists, media and farmers) due to differences in climate change beliefs and 
the willingness to implement climate change measures on farm man­
agement practices (Wilke and Morton 2015; Getson et al., 2022; Telg 
et al., 2020; Fiala et al., 2021). 
At the intersection of this climate dialogue, apart from scientists, the 
media, policymakers, and activists, how dialogue engagement occurs 
when farmers speak out about the climate is the motivational interest of 
this research. 
Investigating climate dialogue engagements requires consideration 
of three dimensions of the topic. First, previous studies note the 
importance of the demographic dimension (Hautea et al., 2021; Basch 
et al., 2022). Due to climate dialogue engagement becoming an 
increasing concern among younger generations, this study explores 
youth engagement particularly. Second, one must consider when in­
dividuals feel empowered to participate in the dialogue (Ettinger et al., 
2023). We narrowed down our research period and viewed the 26th 
United Nations Climate Change Conference (UN COP26) as an oppor­
tunity to reach broader individuals engaged in the global climate dia­
logue. Third, it is essential to distinguish between the venues where the 
dialogues take place (Ettinger et al., 2023). Given that farmers have 
traditionally been positioned as silent individuals in public discussions 
in the media (Stevens et al., 2016), our study chose TikTok. This plat­
form has dominated social media in recent years and is a potential venue 
for farmers, particularly young farmers, to engage more readily in 
climate discussions relative to other social media platforms due to its 
youthful and playful characteristics (Basch et al., 2022). 
1.1. Dialogue principle of empathy informing the study 
Understanding the components of dialogue engagement is as neces­
sary as exploring how dialogue engagement is fostered. To that point, 
the framework of empathy holds a key potential as a facilitator of 
difficult climate discussions for social change (McBeth et al., 2022; Swim 
and Bloodhart, 2015). 
This study is centered upon the empathic dialogue principle, and 
investigates the engagements in climate dialogues initiated by farmers, 
and aims to contribute to the question of: “Has the popularization of the 
playful and youthful social media platform of TikTok fostered empathic 
dialogue engagement surrounding the climate discourse?” 
This broader question is approached by a multi-method design study 
and involves investigating TikTok posts created by farmers (step-I: post- 
focused analysis) followed by interviewing TikTok users who identify 
themselves as a farmer (step-II: user-focused analysis). 
In step-I, post-focused analysis within the digital empathy frame­
work, we approached the question of “How does engagement occur 
when farmers talk about their climate-farming concerns?” We were 
interested in the informants’ engagement (the data includes comments 
on the selected TikTok videos of farmers) over a specific time period, 
particularly when climate dialogues peaked globally on social media. All 
publicly available TikTok posts created by farmers that used the hash­
tags of UN COP26 (e.g., #cop26; #cop26uk) were gathered, and we 
investigated the dialogue engagement of TikTok videos (N = 29) by 
working through the text-based comments (N = 2965). We explored the 
dialogue engagement patterns by categorizing the TikTok comments 
based on the EPITOME framework, a new conceptual framework of 
expressed empathy developed by Sharma et al. (2021), which is used to 
understand empathy in text-based, asynchronous online conversations. 
In step-II, user-focused analysis, we focused on explorative questions 
that considered the subjective opinions of TikTok users: “-Which values 
play a role in the study participants being active on TikTok in connection 
to their professional identities (as farmers)? Which attitudes did they 
develop when initiating and engaging in climate-farming conversations? 
What are their beliefs (personal opinions) on the features of the TikTok 
platform that facilitate the empathic climate dialogue engagement?” We 
aim to explore the participants’ (data includes interviews with TikTok 
farmers) values, attitudes, and beliefs representing their perspectives on 
climate dialogue engagement. The Values Coding approach has been 
used as an affective coding method that investigates the subjective 
qualities of the individuals by directly naming their experiences (Sal­
da˜na, 2021). 
This paper is structured into six sections: The following section 
provides the background information followed by the third section 
which gives the study framework of digital empathy. Next, the data and 
methodology section describes the data collection procedure and details 
the nine methodological steps that we followed. The findings section 
presents the results of the step-I, and step-II respectively. The final 
section concludes with a summary of the study results, provides limi­
tations of the study, and giving recommendations for future research. 
2. Background 
Prior to presenting the study framework of digital empathy, this 
section aims to provide the main scholarly arguments and findings as 
background information within the three contexts that are the focus of 
our study. 
2.1. UN COP26 as a landscape for contemporary youth activism 
The UN COP26, held in Glasgow, Scotland (on October 31st- 
November 13th, 2021), is an annual meeting that brought together 
120 world leaders and over 40,000 registered participants to assess and 
negotiate paths for mitigating and adapting to climate change (UN, 
2022). At that time, due to intensive coverage of the conference in 
traditional and social media, awareness about the conference increased 
significantly among the public (Boykoff et al., 2022; Conner, 2021). 
UN COP26 brought together a global range of young environmental 
activists. Despite the many disappointments about the output of the 
conference (Bloomfield and Steward, 2022), the young activists have 
been described by the media as, “The new generation of young climate 
activists is tougher, stronger, better organized and a thousand times 
more numerous than we were at their age” (Ramsey, 2021). 
This study decided to use the UN COP 26 as an opportunity to explore 
the voices of farmers (as agricultural advocates, environmental activists, 
or non-expert participants) as an occupational group that has rarely 
been involved in climate dialogues in the past. Understanding the 
engagement patterns in farmer-led climate dialogues during UN COP26 
may give insights into how to connect climate change with specific 
values, attitudes, and beliefs among the communities to which farmers 
currently reach out to. 
2.2. Social media, climate dialogue, and farmers 
Previous studies report that most farmers are in the climate-silent 
group, or in defensive mode due to the strong voices surrounding agri- 
food issues, such as activism against industrial livestock farming, food 
scandals, and conflicts between animal welfare activists and farmers 
(Stevens et al., 2018; Rotz, 2018; van der Ploeg, 2020). 
Even though young farmers around the world are becoming involved 
in climate actions in different forms (e.g., marches to make climate 
change policy a priority in the 2023 Farm Bill in the US, calls for climate 
actions to ensure generational renewal in the EU), farmers are still at the 
early stages of using social media to initiate a climate dialogue with their 
professional identities (Unay-Gailhard and Brennan, 2023). 
However, in the new media age, consumers increasingly rely on so­
cial media for news and weather information (Liu and Kim, 2021), and 
they’re looking for transparency in agri-food systems and want to know 
who their farmer is and how their food is produced (Petril’´ak et al., 
2020). These trends highlight that consumers are increasingly willing to 
ensure a sustainable agri-food sector by supporting farmers involved in 
decisions to mitigate and adapt to climate change. These trends indicate 
˙I. Unay-Gailhard et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         


Journal of Rural Studies 102 (2023) 103075
3
an opportunity for farmers to engage more directly with the public and 
their consumers. 
2.3. TikTok as a social media platform for climate dialogue engagement 
research 
Within recent years, TikTok, a video-sharing platform, started to 
dominate social media. In 2022, TikTok was the most downloaded app 
globally and is particularly popular among the younger generation. 
TikTok is best known for its playful and youthful variety of content, from 
music-dance videos to political and financial advice with a “millennial 
humor” style of communication (Anderson, 2020; Bhandari and Bimo, 
2022). 
Besides all these best known characteristics, the educational content 
of TikTok is also widely consumed. Previous studies that have explored 
the educational landscape of TikTok have documented how science 
content that’s presented in TikTok videos helps in the academic devel­
opment of youth (Azman et al., 2021); increases engagement in scien­
tific experiments (Habibi and Salim, 2021); brings success for new 
science communication creators in geoscience (Zawacki et al., 2022); 
and inspires for better instruction in higher education (Radin and Light, 
2022). 
In terms of climate dialogue engagement, previous studies (Basch 
et al., 2022; Hautea et al., 2021) show that TikTok allows non-expert 
users to engage in climate conversations, and this makes the platform 
a vital tool for understanding climate change opinions among various 
professionals. Therefore, TikTok presents an opportunity as an alterna­
tive way of communication and connecting climate dialogue with 
diverse communities including farmers and non-farmer communities. 
There is growing evidence that alternative ways to communicate 
climate change other than using shock and fearful tones, such as playful 
demonstration (vs. a lecture style) or humor (vs. anger), influences 
users’ engagement (Kovacheva et al., 2022; Manzo, 2012). Meijers et al. 
(2019) have documented that positive communication (e.g., using visual 
impact metaphors) increases public engagement in climate dialogues. 
Boykoff and Osnes (2019) evaluated how climate change issues are 
discussed, proposing that humor (e.g., sarcasm) can be an effective 
alternative to climate dialogue engagement. Based on the analysis of 
wildfire cartoons in the media, Moret-Soler et al. (2022) found that 
humor and irony-based cartoons help construct an understanding of 
complex climate change realities. The recent literature reviews on 
humor in climate communication (Kaltenbacher and Drews, 2020; 
Russell et al., 2023) concluded the benefits and challenges of the use of 
humor and highlighted the fact that the use of metaphors and cultural 
references has the power to reach an audience. Even though "it is still 
unclear whether using humor in environmental communication is doing more 
harm than good” (Kaltenbacher and Drews, 2020, p.718), there is 
documented evidence of the positive effects of humor in raising 
awareness, changing perceptions, increasing learning, and behavior 
changes (Kaltenbacher and Drews, 2020). 
Our study explores the climate dialogue engagement in the TikTok 
platform based on three considerations. First, to reach a broader 
segment of global youth where group discussions are based on specific 
interests (interest in farmers’ attitudes, values, and beliefs) among 
diverse communities including farmers and non-farmer communities. 
The TikTok platform is a popular activism hub, particularly among 
youth (Hautea et al., 2021). Second, climate dialogue engagement pat­
terns have already been studied on the social media platforms of Twitter, 
YouTube, and Instagram (Chang et al., 2022; Park et al., 2021; Riley and 
Robertson, 2021), and there might be differences in the reported pat­
terns on under-examined platform of TikTok. Third, based on the 
alternative way of the communication potential of TikTok, our rationale 
for using TikTok was that this would likely be a platform where young 
farmers would present their climate concerns in a different conversa­
tional tone than on other social media platforms, which could foster 
various forms of dialogue engagement experiences. 
3. Study framework: digital empathy 
The dynamics of our lives have changed with the rise of social media, 
and the critical importance of empathy in our society transferred into a 
search for digital empathy in our digital lives. In this section, we first 
introduce the emerging framework of digital empathy in different study 
fields, including its importance in climate dialogue studies, followed by 
the used definition of digital empathy in our research. 
3.1. The emerging framework of digital empathy 
A growing amount of literature on digital empathy shows the 
measurable impact of virtual empathy on individuals and communities. 
A Web of Science keyword search for “digital empathy” and “virtual 
empathy” indicates a growing body of literature over the last twenty 
years, particularly in educational research (Chen, 2018; Redden and 
Way, 2017; Wambsganss et al., 2021; Friesem, 2016); the medical 
literature (Terry and Cain, 2016; Sperandeo et al., 2021), and commu­
nications studies (Deri et al., 2018; Hale et al., 2020; Ravishankar, 2021; 
Lovell et al., 2022; Zhou and Jurgens, 2020; Sharma et al., 2021). 
In the study fields that intersect with communications literature, the 
predictability potential of digital empathy arises as an essential question 
(Deri et al., 2018; Hale et al., 2020; Ravishankar, 2021; Lovell et al., 
2022; Zhou and Jurgens, 2020; Sharma et al., 2020, 2021). For example, 
the factors influencing digital empathy have been investigated for in­
dividuals with limited mobility (e.g., cancer patients) and groups with 
weak offline support (e.g., marginalized farmers in remote regions and 
anorexia patients). Hale et al. (2020) explored the predictors of digital 
empathic support for social media posts created by cancer patients, 
reporting how the construction of online narratives influences the 
reception of digital empathic support. Ravishankar (2021) investigated 
digital platforms’ potential to generate empathy and collect small loans 
for marginalized farmers to fight poverty in India, while a study by 
Lovell et al. (2022) examined the role of empathy-based communication 
in public organization communications during COVID-19. 
3.2. Digital empathy in climate dialogue studies 
The importance of empathy in the climate dialogue first began to be 
documented in recent years. According to findings by Swim and 
Bloodhart (2015), empathic messages positively affect engaging in 
pro-environmental behavior, particularly facilitating donating to envi­
ronmental groups. Hobson and Niemeyer (2013) explain that empathic 
negation is one of the essential components of climate change skepti­
cism, which explains what climate skeptics value and believe. 
Compared to many communication studies incorporating digital 
empathy, few studies provide insights into dialogue engagement when 
farmers speak about their climate concerns. The experimental research 
by McBeth et al. (2022) asked the question, “Do climate change skeptics 
empathize with a narrative that argues the opposite, and does it matter who 
tells the narrative?” and found that climate change skeptics empathized 
more with an organic farmer when he/she shares a pro-climate change 
narrative than they did with another occupational group (i.e. me­
chanics) when they shared the same narrative. The study results suggest 
that for climate change skeptics, it is not the narrative but the narrator 
who matters most of the time. 
As documented by previous rural sociology studies that explore the 
use of social media by farmers, the new media creates a sense of self- 
recognition among “others” at the global level both by validating or 
invalidating career self-concepts (e.g., recognition of interest in their 
product from far away cultures versus disrespect due to food and 
dietary-related movements) (Unay-Gailhard and Sim˜oes, 2022). The 
study by Riley and Roberston (2021) found that farmers’ social media 
posts resonate with “empathy rituals” when discussing the difficulties of 
contemporary farming practices. In this sense, these “empathy rituals” 
include the online provision of thoughts and values by sharing 
˙I. Unay-Gailhard et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         


Journal of Rural Studies 102 (2023) 103075
4
emotional engagements (Brownlie and Shaw, 2019). 
Due to skepticism about climate change appearing as a current social 
phenomenon (Hobson and Niemeyer, 2013), which is reflected by a 
growing polarization of climate change communication on social media 
(Colvin et al., 2020), we assume that the framework of digital empathy 
holds an important potential for distinguishing climate dialogue 
engagement patterns. 
3.3. Definitions: digital empathy and the EPITOME framework of 
expressed empathy 
Based on the previous studies by Davis (1980) and Sharma et al. 
(2020), we define digital empathy as, “traditional empathic character­
istics that include emotional empathy (emotional reactions) and cogni­
tive empathy (interpretational and explorational engagements) through 
text-based online communications.” 
Studies that are interested in online communities as a source of 
support have used both qualitative and quantitative analyses to measure 
digital empathic support based on different measurement scales (Hale 
et al., 2020; Sperandeo et al., 2021; Zhou and Jurgens, 2020; Wambs­
ganss et al., 2021). In this study, step-I of the analyses was based on the 
EPITOME framework to qualitatively measure the empathy expressed in 
online text messages (detailed in the following section). 
The EPITOME framework was chosen due to the objective of the 
study, which was to measure expressed empathy in text-based messages. 
The EPITOME framework was designed by Sharma et al. (2020) and 
developed explicitly to understand empathy in online conversations that 
use text-based asynchronous contexts. TikTok is a type of asynchronous 
communication platform where videos dominate the platform and it 
does not explicitly rely on time-based dialogue engagement in its 
text-based messages. 
4. Data, methodology and study samples 
This study utilized a multi-method design that includes two research 
steps: Step-I, post-focused analysis, and step-II, user-focused analysis 
with nine main stages. Fig. 1 provides an overview of the methodolog­
ical flow of the study. 
4.1. Step-I: post-focused analysis 
The data collection of this study commenced with the creation of new 
TikTok accounts. For each step (step-I and II), to collect the maximum 
number of data and avoid bias caused by a single user’s profile, we 
created two new TikTok accounts with two different mobile devices and 
IP addresses, in addition to using an already created TikTok account. 
This is because TikTok’s algorithm heavily depends on a user’s profile, 
such as their sign-up information, using a mobile device, IP address, and 
user interactions, such as liking, commenting, and sharing videos. 
In step-I, we analyzed text-based comments on the selected TikTok 
posts. This step aimed to understand how dialogue engagement was 
directed and attached to the farmers that created the posts on climate- 
farming issues.  
i) Identification of a socio-political actuality at a global scale: We 
began the purposive sampling by identifying an appropriate 
socio-political actuality on social media that potentially triggered 
young farmers and let them comment on their climate concerns. 
The UN COP 26 was chosen because it was the most recent socio- 
political event at a global scale at the time of the study that also 
witnessed a high number of environmental activism from youth. 
As highlighted by previous studies, the hashtags of international 
events are more likely to end up with hundreds of thousands of 
media engagements globally (Liu and Kim, 2021). UN COP26, as 
a global socio-political occurrence, was an opportunity for 
encouraging farmers to post personalized information about the 
event, and it was thus considered timely to observe the online 
dialogue engagement surrounding this event.  
ii) Identification of relevant hashtags: The data collection strategy 
followed the practice of prior social media studies that use 
hashtags as a research starting point (Riley and Robertson, 2021, 
2022; Basch et al., 2022; Chang et al., 2022). Data was collected 
from January–February 2022 via the most popular UN COP26 
hashtags (#cop26; #cop26uk; #cop26glasgow) used together 
with the farming-related English-language hashtags (#farmer; 
#farmlife; #farm365; #farm24; #dairy; #dairyfarm; #dairy­
farming; #ranchers; #usfarmers; #ukfarming; #australiafarmers; 
Fig. 1. Methodological flow of the study.  
˙I. Unay-Gailhard et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         


Journal of Rural Studies 102 (2023) 103075
5
#irelandfarming; #newzelandfarm; #canadafarmers). Since it 
was not possible to conclude that these hashtags confirmed a 
TikTok user was an actual farmer, we also checked their accounts 
to determine their professional identities.  
iii) Eligibility of the collected data (N = 51): The first two authors 
watched 51 identified videos together and discussed their eligi­
bility. 22 videos were excluded based on four main criteria: 1)the 
post did not have any reactions from viewers, such as posts that 
did not have like(s), comment(s), or emoji(s); 2)the TikTok post 
was not in English; and 3)the post did not include the searched- 
for content. TikTok may incentivize users to use popular or 
actual hashtags that might not relate to their content, so we thus 
eliminated videos that used the identified hashtags but were not 
actually about the relevant content. Based on these selection 
criteria, we concluded with 29 eligible videos, which, along with 
the accompanying comments, were downloaded and stored using 
the screen recording function.  
iv) Writing analytical memos about the selected TikTok videos (N =
29): Before starting to code the digital empathy of the TikTok 
comments, the first two researchers collectively wrote an 
analytical memo. As suggested by previous studies, writing 
analytical memo documents reflections and helps to create an 
intellectual workplace for researchers (Salda˜na, 2021; Thornberg 
and Charmaz, 2014). In our study, the process of writing 
analytical memos aimed to create a common understanding of the 
content and context of the video. 
Study sample-I: 29 videos were consisting of 2965 conversations 
involving about 187 accounts. Based on what the videos featured and 
the users’ “bio” information, we concluded that the sample included 
TikTok users from the US, the UK, Canada, Ireland, Australia, New 
Zealand and was comprised of 14 men and 10 women (in 5 videos there 
was no identity-related information). The selected videos frequently 
included the following five content aspects: 1)documenting their current 
work setting; 2)depicting exchange to create awareness about environ­
mental concerns surrounding their farming practices; 3)expressing 
feelings and emotions; 4)expressing mockery with sarcasm and humor; 
and 5) thinking in a reflective manner by sharing personal knowledge 
and perspectives.  
v) Coding the comments in the selected TikTok videos (N = 2965): The 
first two authors read each comment during the same timeframe, 
considering the semiotic interactions of written text, emojis, and 
images used in the comments. After reading the comments, the au­
thors individually classified each comment with the guidance of the 
EPITOME framework (Sharma et al., 2020). 
The EPITOME framework includes three digital empathic commu­
nication mechanisms: for emotional empathy I-Emotional Reactions, 
and for cognitive empathy II-Interpretation Engagement, and III- 
Explorational Engagement. The EPITOME framework differentiates be­
tween these three categories as “no” communication, “weak” commu­
nication, and “strong” communication. 
However, moving through the coding, to be more explicit regarding 
the annotation details, we adjusted these differentiated coding cate­
gories based on the structure of our data and our own interpretations. In 
our study we coded the digital empathy of the comments of the selected 
TikTok videos with four online dialogue engagement categories, and 
eight sub-categories, which was: I-Emotional Reactions (differentiated 
between i) expressed briefly or ii) expressed explicitly); II-Interpretation 
Engagement (differentiated between iii) similarity or iv) paraphrases); 
III-Explorational Engagement (differentiated between v) specific or vi) 
generic); and IV-Non-communication of Digital Empathy (differentiated 
between vii) civil tone or viii) uncivil tone). 
4.2. Step-II: user-focused analysis 
As a second step, we considered the perspectives and experiences of 
TikTok users (farmers). This step was aimed at understanding the Tik­
Tok users’ practices of posting and engaging with TikTok regarding their 
climate-farming related concerns.  
vi) Identification of potential farmers as TikTok users: The potential 
study participants were identified by three sampling strategies: 1) 
publicly available data of the TikTok users that we analyzed in 
step-I; 2)a hashtag search, and publicly available press articles 
that present TikTok influencers from the farming sector; 3) 
snowball sampling where research participants were asked to 
assist the study in identifying other potential farmers who use 
TikTok with their farming identities. The identified relevant users 
(N = 87) were approached via their publicly available contact 
information, such as email addresses, phone, or social media 
accounts.  
vii) Designing the interview protocol: The interview protocol was 
developed by addressing the perspectives of TikTok users 
regarding their values towards engagement on TikTok with their 
professional identities, the attitudes they develop on the plat­
form, and their beliefs on the features of TikTok that facilitate 
climate dialogue engagement. Our questions were purposely 
open-ended to guide the discussion. The participants whose 
TikTok videos we analyzed in step-I (N = 4) were approached 
with further questions about their experiences regarding the 
engagement to elicit deeper discussions on their videos posted 
during UN COP26. An ethical clearance certificate was obtained 
from the ethics committee of the first authors’ institution.  
viii) Interviews with TikTok users: In total, we interviewed 12 TikTok 
users who self-identify themselves as farmers and who were En­
glish speaking. Interviews were conducted online and in person 
from January–March 2023. Each interview lasted between 30 
and 40 min and all of the interviews were recorded with the 
participant’s permission and transcribed with Nvivo software. 
Study Sample-II: Our sample consisted of 12 TikTok users who had 
public accounts with a varied number of followers (max ~820,000 and 
min ~800). Five of the TikTok users reported that they post frequently 
about their environmental concerns surrounding farming. Our sample 
comprised of five men and seven women (US = 6; UK = 3; Canada = 2; 
Australia = 1). The average age of the respondents was 34 and all of our 
participants were full-time farmers. Most participants were multigen­
erational farmers involved in animal and crop farming, while others 
were engaged in mixed farming and logging. In terms of their social 
media use, all participants reported that they are also active on other 
social media platforms, with Instagram, Facebook, and YouTube being 
the most common other platforms they were active on in parallel with 
TikTok.  
ix) Qualitative analysis of the interviews with Values Coding: Data 
collected from the semi-structured interviews aimed to investi­
gate the subjective perspectives of TikTok users by directly 
acknowledging their experiences. We used the affective coding 
methods of Values Coding and analyzed the data using short 
codes (e.g., professional responsibility, sociability, timeliness) 
rather than sentences. Values Coding is considered an integrated 
system of values, attitudes, and beliefs of human experiences 
(Kozinets and Gambetti 2021; Daiute, 2013), and defined as "a 
value is what you think/feel is important. An attitude is how you 
think/feel about someone or something. And a belief is what you 
personally think/feel to be true” (Salda˜na, 2021, p. 168). Codes 
are constructed inductively, and reflection on their meanings and 
interaction between values, attitudes, and beliefs is presented 
with three broad themes. 
˙I. Unay-Gailhard et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         


Journal of Rural Studies 102 (2023) 103075
6
5. Findings 
Our findings focus first on exploring expressed empathy and the non- 
communication of empathy towards TikTok videos posted by farmers 
during the UN COP26. We then explore TikTok farmers’ perspectives on 
the TikTok platform’s potential for emphatic support. 
5.1. Results of step-I: post-focused analysis 
Our results highlight the central finding that digital empathy in­
cludes all of the investigated empathy categories with different levels of 
support. The typical engagement style of the analyzed climate dialogues 
is supportive, with a strong level of emotional reactions and involve­
ment with a non-communication of empathy with a civil tone. There was 
a moderate level of interpretational engagement. We observe a tentative 
level of support for explorational engagement and involvement in dia­
logue with an uncivil tone. Fig. 2 provides a detailed overview of the 
findings from the emerging digital empathy, as well as the no empathy 
categories and exemplar quotes.  
I Emotional Reactions: We found a strong level of support for 
emotional reactions. Most of the time, emotional reactions aim to 
express a mutual understanding through thoughts, feelings, and 
stories. The comments briefly expressed their understanding, 
with just short text messages or emojis being more frequent than 
comments expressing mutual understanding explicitly with 
further thoughts and feelings. Emotional reactions tended to 
come from both farming and non-farming participants. 
i) Expressed briefly: Comments that expressed the feelings, ex­
periences, perceptions, and viewpoints with warmth and 
compassion towards the TikTok user/dialogue participants, 
often including support, agreement, and confirmation in the 
form of short text messages, such as “I love your logic”. Some 
comments did not include any text-written comments but 
included supportive and conformational emoji(s) or just likes, 
with the applause emoji, heart emoji, and hundred points 
emoji being the most often used ones.  
ii) Expressed explicitly: Comments that were explicitly expressed 
often included one or several additional supportive messages 
such as “So good to see that there are actually people who care 
about the environment whilst still getting the job done. Love 
it”. We found that explicitly expressed thoughts in our sample 
tended to hold an orientation that was either linked to per­
sonal concerns (e.g., comments using ‘I” such as “So true. I’ve 
never thought about it like this. Great point”) or to be driven 
by relational concerns with others (e.g., comments using 
“we,” such as “We need the farmers to keep producing 
excellent meat, keep it up please”).  
II Interpretational Engagement: Our study found a moderate 
level of support for interpretational engagement. Even comments 
that included information sharing about a topic may indicate an 
understating of the TikTok user/dialogue participants’ view­
points but do not count as communicating an understanding (e.g., 
“big dairy companies are the polluters, not the farmers”). The 
study annotated these comments under the non-communication 
of empathy.  
iii) Similarity: Interpretational engagement comments described 
similar feelings of the TikTok user/dialogue participant. The 
comments tended to communicate understanding through 
the emphasizing of individual agreement (e.g., “I had this 
conversation with my other half yesterday. So true”).  
iv) Paraphrases: Comments that contained paraphrases of the 
TikTok user’s/dialogue participant’s expressions, such as 
“Definitely, stop shipping meat halfway round the world 
when we can produce better here” for a TikTok post on a 
similar topic. Such expressions tended to show an interpre­
tational engagement by re-expressing the meaning of the 
TikTok post by using different words.  
III Explorational Engagement: Even though we found a tentative 
support for an explorational engagement, the number of explo­
rational reactions was very high for certain videos, particularly 
for videos where the TikTok users created content that valued the 
process and kept a conversational tone. Most of the time, such 
explorational engagement comments tended to be from a non- 
farming audience, and contained curiosity, questioning, and a 
willingness to resonate with the answer if coherence emerged 
through dialogue.  
v) Specific: Often, comments specifying a certain point included 
direct questions to the TikTok user/dialogue participants 
aiming for a personal discussion, such as “If you plant a tree, 
what’s the chance it will reach maturity? I doubt more than 
half but what do I know three planted is sure better than 
nothing”.  
vi) Generic: Comments that did not specify a certain point to the 
TikTok user/dialogue participants and were often aimed at a 
further discussion on a general topic related to the stated or 
not stated issue in the dialogue. These commenters mainly 
used the space for social debate, and TikTok posts helped 
them to connect quickly with diverse communities (farmers 
and non-farmers). These generic comments often supported 
the TikTok user’s post with not stated but related arguments 
via open and close-ended questions such as “Can anybody 
name anything that has changed in your daily life due to the 
local effects of climate change?” In some cases, such a way of 
engaging in a dialogue tends to privilege personal opinion at 
the expense of reducing expert authorities’ views that rely on 
science-based evidence.  
IV Non-communication of Digital Empathy: We found strong 
support for the non-communication of empathy on a spectrum 
between engagement with civil to uncivil attitudes. In our sample 
most of the non-empathic comments were containing civil tones, 
providing factual, personal, and statistical information.  
vii) Civil tone: Comments only providing information and 
advice in a civil tone mainly included three types of ex­
pressions: 1)providing informational comments gathered 
from informant actors such as the media and scientists (e.g., 
“The science shows that grass-fed livestock is carbon 
neutral. The issue is with intensive farming and food is­
sues”); 2)sharing their perceptions and understandings (e.g., 
“Deforestation will eventually put loggers out of business”); 
and 3)sharing personal experiences (e.g., “I’d take 1980 in a 
heartbeat, I went to the creamery meeting today. 15 farmers 
showed up from five countries, used to be 400 farmers from 
two countries”). Furthermore, many civil tone comments 
specifically referred to their job titles to display their 
expertise with the discussed subjects, such as “I’m a teacher 
of …”; “I have a master in …”; “I work in both sectors …”.  
viii) Uncivil tone: The uncivil comments included criticisms of 
political leaders, countries due to their unethical economic 
interests, activists, and the TikTok user/dialogue partici­
pants. The uncivil patriotic statements expressed were as 
persistent as unpatriotic ones (e.g., “Irish farming is one of 
˙I. Unay-Gailhard et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         


Journal of Rural Studies 102 (2023) 103075
7
Fig. 2. Findings of step-I: How does engagement occur when farmers speak out about the climate? 
Note: Following studies by Clair and Dufresne (2004) and Unay-Gailhard and Sim˜oes (2022), we indicate the Level of Support (LOS): Strong support: a majority of the 
analyzed TikTok comments were included in this category of online dialogue engagement; Moderate support: some of the analyzed TikTok comments contained 
statements in this category; Tentative support: a very small number of the analyzed TikTok comments included statements in this category. 
˙I. Unay-Gailhard et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         


Journal of Rural Studies 102 (2023) 103075
8
the best ways of farming in the world. FACT” versus “Truth 
hurts. Urban sprawl especially here in the US is probably the 
worst thing that’s happening”). Most of the time, the nega­
tive regard for other countries’ success in climate policies or 
comparison between countries’ greenhouse-gas emissions 
from food production helped with the easy engagement of 
external comments formed around the topic that kept the 
dialogue continuing. Many uncivil comments about vegans, 
vegetarians, and climate activists used short insults. In many 
posts, the written statistics, in combination with sounds and 
visuals, reinforced a dialogue showing skepticism of the 
sources of the information, and in some cases, in an uncivil 
way. Particularly notable is that critics emphasized that the 
shared factual information was wrong and, therefore, they 
are not qualified to keep speaking about the impacts of 
climate change with these given facts (e.g., “shit talking”; 
“bias research, it’s inhuman to ignore the facts”). 
5.2. Findings: Step-II, user-focused analysis 
Our results give insights into the TikTok farmers’ perspectives, and 
particularly for three broad themes. The first concerns their values that 
play a role in being active on TikTok with their professional identities 
and the reasons they believe their self-representation on TikTok is 
important for social interactions. The second theme focuses on the at­
titudes they developed when they initiated their climate-farming related 
concerns, including the perspectives of climate-silent participants. The 
third theme concerns TikTok users’ opinions on the features of the 
TikTok platform regarding public engagement of climate-farming con­
versations. Fig. 3 provides the list of codes with three themes. 
5.2.1. Theme-I: Self-representation on TikTok with a professional identity 
Among the respondents, one of the highly pronounced core values of 
TikTok for their farmer identities is the self-representation to a global/ 
wider audience through simple actions (e.g., micro-videos with simple 
content and a light communication style). What participants value in 
TikTok is not only related to its best-known characteristics of enjoyment 
(e.g., joy, humor, playfulness, easygoingness), but also as a professional 
tool (e.g., being in contact with the next generation of consumers, a 
business presence) as put forward by farmer 7 and farmer 8 from the US: 
"The research shows that Gen Z decides within the first eight seconds 
of whether or not they’re interested in a product … TikTok is where 
the next generation of consumers are headed." 
"It is just I’m a business owner, and you know, you got to keep up 
with the time." 
Besides the importance of social interactions (e.g., meeting new 
people, cooperation) and following the direction of digital life (e.g., 
embracing new platforms in a timely manner), the participants also 
stressed the potential of TikTok as a dynamic learning landscape (e.g., 
gathering inspiration, knowledge-exchange with the Q&A feature that 
allows users to ask or answer questions on the app). As a farmer 10 from 
Scotland and a farmer 4 from Australia, put it: 
"It’s been a really good way to share skills. I would say TikTok is an 
amazing learning platform. It’s quite different from YouTube. There 
are no classics professors and lots of tutorials." 
"People are willing to learn, and I can respond easily with a video … 
sometimes comments can be taken out of context. So that’s what I 
like about TikTok. At the end of the conversation, you can have a 
script of videos on the one subject." 
Fig. 3. Findings of step-II: TikTok farmers’ values, attitudes, and beliefs 
Note: In step-II study approached the questions “-Which values play a role in the study participants being active on TikTok in connection to their professional 
identities (as farmers)? Which attitudes did they develop when initiating and engaging in climate-farming conversations? What are their beliefs on the features of the 
TikTok platform that facilitate the empathic climate dialogue engagement?” with qualitative analysis of interviews with the Values Coding approach. This figure 
shows the codes that were used to present this study’s step-II findings within three themes. 
˙I. Unay-Gailhard et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         


Journal of Rural Studies 102 (2023) 103075
9
These orientations are directly connected to respondents’ values of 
TikTok interactions with their professional identities. Involvement in 
TikTok is about having a voice and investing in others while balancing 
joy and professionalism. 
5.2.2. Theme-II: Initiate a climate dialogue 
Respondents believed that only a few farmers prefer to engage in the 
climate dialogue in their daily life and on social media. For most par­
ticipants, farmers’ engagement in the climate dialogue via their social 
media accounts requires courage, solid knowledge, cautiousness, and 
deliberate communication due to the polarized and intimidating nature 
of the dialogue. In our sample, we observed both participants who do not 
prefer to initiate climate-farming conversations (climate-silent partici­
pants), as well as those who initiate climate-farming conversations on a 
regular basis through their TikTok accounts (not climate-silent partici­
pants). Perspectives of these two groups are presented in the following: 
5.2.2.1. Group-I: perspectives of not climate-silent participants. Core to 
most respondents’ motivation to initiate a climate dialogue is their belief 
in the subsequent need for more information on climate issues from 
farmers’ perspectives. Participants from that not-silent group repeatedly 
said: "Most people do not know how farmers respect the environment for 
their farming practices." This belief is highly evident through the 
motivation among participants to keep creating climate-farming con­
tent. Participants generally expressed how engagement in the climate 
dialogue mainly comes from the younger generation from local, na­
tional, and global areas, including farming and non-farming commu­
nities. As a result of support from their audience (e.g., spreading a video 
with millions of views or asking specific questions about current climate- 
farming related events), farmers noticed that they had a position in the 
climate discourse and felt the responsibility, as expressed by female 
farmer 2 from Canada, and male farmer 10 from Scotland: 
“On TikTok, the most important lesson I’ve learned is that people do 
not know what farmers are doing to help the climate. I’m connecting 
the dots by showing our farm, how we reduce fertilizer emissions.” 
“In climate change discussions, one needs to recognize that farmers 
are at the forefront of the solution, not just the problem.” 
Interviewees shared a range of attitudes for promoting public 
engagement in the climate-farming-related dialogue on TikTok, and 
diverse outcomes such as engagement might be expected to contribute 
to dialogue participants’ understanding. For the most part, these atti­
tudes and expectations let them emphasize key arguments in their 
videos, such as providing personal life stories (e.g., “I’m the 4th gener­
ation living on this land, then I care about the health of my soil”), 
sharing firsthand farming issue experiences related to climate change, or 
providing statistics from official sources in their countries via visuals, 
music, and texts. 
Key elaborated attitudes that participants develop when they initiate 
and engage in climate-farming conversations were: i) choosing to not 
use too defensive of a tone, to not use jargon, abbreviations, and big 
words; ii) to be reactive to all polarized comments with compassion; and 
iii) to keep objectivity as a goal to meet when they engage in replying to 
any opposition. Two farmers from Canada and Scotland, respectively, 
expressed their acknowledgment of other climate dialogue participants 
as: 
"The middle ground approach is possible. It’s always one person’s 
completely right or another person’s completely wrong. I’ve learned 
to take both of those, combine them, and just make a thing that 
makes sense for both parties. I find that has the most success." 
“One of the things that doesn’t work is excluding people from the 
conversation … how you respond to comments is as important as 
how you engage.” 
5.2.2.2. Group-II: perspectives of climate-silent participants. Participants 
who prefer to be silent on their climate-farming related concerns on 
TikTok or who prefer to post about their environmental concerns indi­
rectly (e.g., share other users’ posts) are likely to have the perception 
that they will face judgment from the public. In the case of these silent 
farmers, uncomfortable experiences with their previous posts about the 
climate lead to not engaging in actual climate discourses, and rather to 
talking indirectly to convey that farmers should not be treated as 
“climate deniers”. 
The narratives of climate-silent participants tell the position of their 
profession in the climate discourses as an “easy target” due to the land 
occupation and involvement with animal farming, which are highly 
leading conflicts in soil health and animal welfare conversations. Initi­
ating a climate dialogue is associated with "risky content" due to the 
potential to destroy their accountability among their consumers, or such 
a dialogue requires “endless conversation” with a lot of effort, regardless 
of whether the conversation is related to the farming sector. 
As a consequence, a TikTok user, no matter their interest in pursuing 
conflict or not, must interact with another video and overcome with 
another attitude. Furthermore, the narratives of these climate-silent 
participants repeatedly mention the platform’s limitations. For almost 
all, the complexity of the topic is colored by the perception that the short 
video format of TikTok is not suitable for explaining their concerns. As a 
result of all these messages, farmers may easily choose to be silent (or 
self-censor them) to avoid conflict or to present a political opposition. 
5.2.3. Theme-III: Empathy & public engagement in climate dialogue 
The respondents have a similar view about the high potential of 
empathic reactions in environmental conversations on TikTok relative 
to other social media platforms. Their thoughts were most prominent 
when they described the potential of empathic reactions: First, the 
importance of the architecture of the platform. Second, a belief that 
participants have the potential to capture attention with their look that 
is different to how farmers are portrayed on traditional and other social 
media platforms. These two most prominent thoughts were presented in 
the following way: 
The first significant emphasis was related to the characteristics and 
architecture of the TikTok platform concerning four key arguments:  
i) the way of spreading messages in a sensational way (“like a caffeine 
bomb”) that results in a high number of engagements in a short time 
that is different than a YouTube videos which need more time to be 
consumer and with different approaches (such as “get your coffee, 
and have a seat”).  
ii) relative to Instagram (as described in the narratives as a “static piece 
of art,” “pleasing approach,” “esthetic”), on TikTok, the imperfection 
in self-presentation promotes engagement that values the person 
more than, as these words put it: 
“Having face-to-face video interaction with people, replying again 
with face-to-face interaction videos makes the platform (TikTok) a 
lot genuinely nicer about it and more empathetic”.   
iii) compared to Twitter, which is associated with several narratives 
that are “highly polarized” and “wordy”, on TikTok, the 
straightforward self-representation with playful and humorous 
tones means that arguments take place with less tension, as put 
forward by farmer 1: 
“Backgrounds of TikTok posts create incentives to get to know 
somebody better than just words written on a paper. What people 
argue is against words, not against people”.  
˙I. Unay-Gailhard et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         


Journal of Rural Studies 102 (2023) 103075
10
iv) the technical dimension of TikTok that contributes to easy dia­
logue engagement are described as “giving a space for a more 
experimental way of communication,”; “easy to respond to other 
people with micro-videos,”; and “superior editing tools.” 
As a second major emphasis, respondents often referred to the large 
part of the power of empathic engagement in dialogues to stem from the 
particularity of farming as an occupation, which is related to their un­
usual portrayal on TikTok that destroys the “fixed views towards 
farmers”. The core belief of many interviewees is that farmers in society 
are perceived as “part of the environmental problem”, “often portrayed 
in old school way of discussions with conservative moods”, and “talking 
about the profession more mechanically”. This shared belief forms a core 
guidance that defines the way they search for new storytelling styles and 
how they elaborate upon the reasoning for empathic reactions. 
6. Discussion and conclusion 
This study explores public engagement in farmer-led initiated 
climate dialogues on TikTok. The research centers on the empathic 
dialogue principle, and we investigate engagements in climate dialogues 
by identifying emotional and cognitive empathy in conversations and 
extracting their rationales. A two-step analysis was involved that 
investigated digital empathy towards TikTok posts created by farmers 
(step-I: post-focused analysis) and exploring TikTok users’ perspectives 
on public engagement with their climate-farming related posts (step-II: 
user-focused analysis). Including these two main data sources allowed us 
to understand the differences between the two, that is how engagement 
occurs when farmers present their point of view to others versus how 
farmers perceive the engagement to their posts when talking about the 
climate. 
Our findings conclude with four main points that provide directions 
for future research. First, our results provide insight into studies inves­
tigating the outcome of climate communication among communities 
that share specific interests and values (Hayhoe, 2021; van Swol et al., 
2022). Second, this study advanced the research on cognitive engage­
ment in climate communication (Topp et al., 2019; McBeth et al., 2022). 
Third, this research answers the call to explore the climate conversation 
on under-examined social media platforms (Pearce et al., 2019; Liu and 
Kim, 2021) and elaborates on the role of humor in environmental 
communication (Kaltenbacher and Drews, 2020; Russell et al., 2023) 
while also exploring the educational landscape of TikTok (Zawacki 
et al., 2022; Tan et al., 2022). Finally, the results expand our knowledge 
on the effects of social media on farming identities (Riley and Robertson, 
2021; Unay-Gailhard and Brennan, 2023), mainly giving insights into 
how digital empathy serves to break down self-silencing among farmers. 
The following subsection aims to discuss these four points with 
concluding remarks. 
6.1. Emotional empathy in the climate communication and community 
shared values 
First, the results of this study suggest that the typical empathic 
engagement is emotional reactions (expressing emotions briefly or 
explicitly), followed by cognitive engagement (interpretational and 
explorational engagement, respectively). The subjective perspectives of 
TikTok users demonstrates that their climate-farming related TikTok 
posts with self-representation (e.g., showing their environmental 
farming practices, demonstrating how climate change is harming pro­
duction) creates empathic reactions or civil tone dialogue engagements, 
particularly when they’re involved in a dialogue with a manner of 
acknowledging and being reactive to the participants’ comments. 
This empathic reaction pattern aligns with a previous study that has 
highlighted the public’s engagement with farmers’ social media posts 
with "empathy rituals" (Riley and Robertson, 2021). Considering the 
online networks of farmers as an affluent community in terms of the 
presence of conversations based on the shared values about farming, 
food production, a rural way of life, the observed empathic reaction is 
consistent with communication studies that have shown evidence that 
having climate dialogues with individuals that share specific values and 
interests can support positive conversational outcomes (Bloomfield 
et al., 2020; Hayhoe 2021; Ettinger et al., 2023). 
6.2. Cognitive empathy and climate-communication engagement 
Second, our analysis reveals that even though the climate dialogues 
that farmers facilitate contain alternative ways of communication (e.g., 
expressing emotions with mockery or reflectively sharing their thinking 
with dynamic demonstration videos), it was not sufficient to create a 
strong level of support for cognitive empathy. In our sample, the 
involvement in climate dialogue with cognitive engagement (particu­
larly as an explorational engagement including comments that aim to 
explore feelings, experiences, and viewpoints of the TikTok user/dia­
logue participant) was very high only for certain videos. Understanding 
the rationale behind this finding requires further analysis of cognitive 
engagement and its relationship between the narrative (story) and 
narrator (identity). 
Further to that point, our findings align with the study by Topp et al. 
(2019), which found not a direct but indirect link between cognitive 
engagement and entertaining climate videos. The authors found that 
entertaining videos may increase the perceived entertainment, and that 
perceived entertainment increases the cognitive engagement indepen­
dently from the narrator’s characteristics (e.g., narrator’s political 
identity, age, and education). 
As documented by McBeth et al. (2022), who investigated the 
narrative with which identity plays a role in the climate conversation 
engagement: listening to climate-related narratives from organic 
farmers versus mechanics matters for climate skeptics. In our study, 
while the narrators share similar professional identities (farmer), a po­
tential challenge is that the characteristics of the narrators and the 
communication style of the narrative (e.g., engaging presenters with 
charisma) may impact the explorational cognitive engagement. Apart 
from the relationship between narrative versus narrator, the findings of 
a relatively low level of support for explorational cognitive engagement 
(compared to an emotional empathic reaction and interpretational 
cognitive engagement) is also understandable because cognitive 
engagement, most of the time, requires advancing on the paths of 
emotional reactions. 
To that point, citizen engagement and activism represents a complex 
web of contexts and emotions. While some research does point out that 
discrete emotional reactions are not as reliable for predicting engage­
ment with climate activism (Chapman et al., 2017; Ettinger et al., 2021; 
Sanford et al., 2023), the emotional bonds between individuals are seen 
as the foundation for individual and community agency around common 
general needs (Brennan et al., 2022; Odera et al., 2022; Mata­
rrita-Cascante and Brennan, 2012). For the latter, engagement is an 
outcome of the relationships developed through purposive interaction 
around common general needs. It is this interaction that builds social 
and emotional bonds, increases understanding, awareness and empathy, 
and opens up venues for engagement over a range of topics, including 
climate activism. Similarly, recent work has focused on environmental 
empathy as a factor in behavioral changes toward pro-environmental 
activism (Berenguer, 2007, 2010; Tam, 2013). Altogether, the motiva­
tions for activism represent a complex web of societal, cultural, and 
personal attributes that can emerge at the local level, while also being 
applied to a more global level. 
6.3. Farmer-led climate communication on TikTok platform 
Third, we found a strong level of support for the non-communication 
of empathy on a spectrum between engagement in climate dialogue with 
civil to uncivil tones. Together with all investigated categories 
˙I. Unay-Gailhard et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         


Journal of Rural Studies 102 (2023) 103075
11
(communication and non-communication of empathy), the results sug­
gest that the non-communication of empathy with comments containing 
civil tones is as persistent as empathic comments that express emotions 
briefly or explicitly. The evidence from our two-step analysis suggests 
that emotional reactions and non-communication of empathy with a 
civil tone tended to come from both farming and non-farming 
participants. 
These findings show that TikTok does not view engaging in climate 
conversations just with emotional empathic support to the posts of 
farmers; it is also a platform that includes non-empathic communication 
with comments that share beliefs, gather knowledge from different 
sources, give advice, and share perceptions and understanding. Because 
the TikTok platform differs in terms of the way of communication and 
the architecture of Twitter, Instagram, YouTube, and Facebook, our 
results are well-suited for comparison with other platforms. 
Social media and climate conversation studies are in the early stage 
of understating the different roles that social media platforms play in 
facilitating dialogue engagement (Liu and Kim, 2021). Each social 
media platform may affect climate dialogue participation differently 
(Tuitjer et al., 2022), and to what extent non-expert individuals feel 
empowered to participate in climate dialogue depends on the dialogue 
venue (Ettinger et al., 2023). 
For example, climate dialogue on Twitter contributes to a polariza­
tion between climate skeptics and climate-aware individuals (Moernaut 
et al., 2022). While we are living with solid evidence that a dairy- and 
meat-based diet is causing devastation to the environment, Facebook 
discussions on livestock production may encompass the controversy and 
polemical representations and shed light on the ways of livestock pro­
duction legitimization on its platform (Olausson, 2018). The analysis of 
Greta Thunberg’s YouTube videos document how strongly ageism, 
sexism, and ableism are ingrained in climate change communication 
(Park et al., 2021). 
Climate dialogue among non-experts on TikTok. Responders notions 
about the potential for TikTok to influence non-expert youth engage­
ment are highly consistent. Our results show that TikTok offers signifi­
cant potential for discussion among non-experts and, most of the time, is 
associated with seeking an imperfect climate discourse (different than 
the “elite discourse” (Olausson, 2018) nature of Twitter) with brief 
pre-dialogue opportunities. This result aligns with the findings of Basch 
et al. (2022) and Hautea et al. (2021), which highlight the TikTok 
platform’s affordances that help with the involvement of non-experts in 
climate dialogues among diverse backgrounds. 
TikTok as a learning landscape. What is notable among the narratives 
of the study participants is how the TikTok platform provides a learning 
landscape. Even though there is a rising interest in the educational di­
mensions of TikTok (Azman et al., 2021; Habibi and Salim, 2021) as a 
possible way of effective science communication (Zawacki et al., 2022; 
Tan et al., 2022), there are limited studies that investigate the alterna­
tive ways of climate-farming communications on social media. As our 
findings suggest, the self-representation of farmers on TikTok with 
professional identities is not only about having a voice and joy but also 
reciprocally investing in others: gathering and sharing experiences and 
knowledge by entertaining videos with informal educational contexts. 
Alternative ways of climate communication on TikTok. For non-climate 
silent study participants, mockery (the use of sarcasm, irony, humor) 
was noted as one of the strategies for engaging with other users. Creating 
climate-farming related content with short, experimental, and dynamic 
style videos and expressing mockery can turn into sensational attention, 
expressed as “like a caffeine bomb” and emphasized as a way to raise 
awareness. This finding contributes to studies documenting the rela­
tionship between humor and climate communication engagement 
(Boykoff, 2011; Boykoff and Osnes, 2019; Kaltenbacher and Drews, 
2020; Russell et al., 2023), particularly within the study by Kovacheva 
et al. (2022) and Manzo (2012), which provides evidence of how simple, 
humorous messages (e.g., cartoons, internet memes) can encourage 
people to engage in online conversations about climate change. 
6.4. Farmer identity in the digital age 
Fourth, our analysis identified some fundamental values that shape 
the attitudes towards climate-dialogue initiation efforts among farmers, 
which end up with a division of non-climate silent and climate silent 
groups. The core belief of the need for further information on climate 
issues from farmers’ perspectives conditions the degree to which farmers 
do initiate a dialogue. 
For the non-climate silent group, as a result of empathic support from 
their audience, farmers noticed that they had a position in the climate 
discourse and sought to promote engagement. For the climate silent 
group, the complexity of the topic (political dimensions and its scientific 
knowledge intensive nature) led them to self-censor the climate dia­
logue. This research assumes that the framework of digital empathy 
holds the potential to understand rationales that mobilize dialogue 
engagement and helps to overcome the “climate spiral of silence” 
(Ettinger et al., 2023), where individuals are not willing to express their 
opinions if their belief is not shared by others, which in turn creates a 
climate silence spiral (Geiger and Swim, 2016). 
Even though food-related social movements (e.g., organic and local 
food movements) have motivated a growing number of youths, partic­
ularly females involved with alternative farming practices as a means of 
transforming the food system or experiencing a way of farm life (Bruce, 
2019; Unay-Gailhard and Bojnec, 2021), farmers are still in the early 
stages of using social media with their professional identities (Unay-­
Gailhard and Brennan, 2023). Further to that point, our results note how 
digital empathy contributes to breaking down the "climate spiral of 
silence" among farmers and the communities they reach out to. These 
results give insights into the changing dynamics of farming identities in 
the digital age, where “(re)presentations” of farming live (Riley and 
Robertson, 2022)- may signal a need for emotional and cognitive public 
support. 
6.5. Limitations and future research 
This study has some limitations and also there’s potential to further 
explore digital empathy in climate dialogues initiated by farmers. First, 
the sample sizes of qualitative analysis are limited regarding the number 
of farmers’ integrations on TikTok with the climate-farming dialogue. As 
noted by previous studies (Stevens et al., 2018; Masambuka-Kanchewa 
et al., 2021; Unay-Gailhard and Sim˜oes, 2022), due to the strong voices 
surrounding the agri-food scandals and activist groups (animal welfare 
activism, vegan and vegetarian activism), few farmers feel empowered 
to initiate a climate-farming dialogue on social media. Therefore, 
reaching out to farmers who are engaging in climate conversations is a 
difficult task, and particularly reaching out to such farmers using their 
social media accounts with professional identities. 
The second limitation is the language challenges related to the study 
of TikTok at a global level. In our study, we target English-language 
hashtags and posts for data collection. Such a data sampling strategy 
requires comparing studies that consider non-English language coun­
tries’ perspectives to handle the limitation of geographical settings. 
This study investigates the empathic dialogue engagement in TikTok 
with qualitative research with TikTok data, and interviews with TikTok 
farmers, and there is a future potential to explore the power of digital 
communication technologies in shaping specific strategies for more 
effective engagement in climate-farming dialogue. This starting point 
may assist further studies that aim to explore cognitive engagement and 
its relationship between the narrative (story) and narrator (identity) by 
considering the new farmer identity in the digital age. 
Declaration of competing interest 
I have no relevant interest (that might appear to affect my ability to 
present data objectively) to disclose. There is no financial relationship 
that might be construed as a conflict of interest significant enough to 
˙I. Unay-Gailhard et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         


Journal of Rural Studies 102 (2023) 103075
12
influence the results or interpretation of submitted study. 
Data availability 
The data that has been used is confidential. 
Acknowledgment 
Funding was received for this study’s data analyses and writing 
period from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innova­
tion programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Global Fellowship 
grant agreement No [895185]. Project title: YOUNG FARMERS: What 
can digital communications do for generational renewal in farming? 
This research utilized data collected from TikTok, a publicly available 
social media platform. For ethical research issues involving social 
media, this study received ethics committee approval from the research 
institute of the first author (IUG). The data collection and initial analyses 
were carried out during the research stay of the first author (IUG) at the 
University of Florida, Department of Agricultural Education and 
Communication (AEC) between January–April 2022. 
References 
Anderson, K.E., 2020. Getting acquainted with social networks and apps: it is time to talk 
about TikTok. Libr. Hi Tech News 37 (4), 7–12. 
Azman, A.N., Rezal, N.S.A., Zulkeifli, N.Y., Mat, N.A.S., Saari, I.S., Ab Hamid, A.S., 2021. 
Acceptance of TikTok on the youth towards education development. Borneo 
International Journal eISSN 2636-9826 4 (3), 19–25. 
Basch, C.H., Yalamanchili, B., Fera, J., 2022. # Climate change on TikTok: a content 
analysis of videos. J. Community Health 1–5. 
Bavorov´a, M., Unay-Gailhard, ˙I., Ponkina, E.V., Pilaˇrov´a, T., 2020. How sources of 
agriculture information shape the adoption of reduced tillage practices? J. Rural 
Stud. 79, 88–101. 
Berenguer, J., 2007. The effect of empathy in proenvironmental attitudes and behaviors. 
Environ. Behav. 39 (2), 269–283. 
Bhandari, A., Bimo, S., 2022. Why’s everyone on TikTok now? The algorithmized self 
and the future of self-making on social media. Social Media+ Society 8 (1), 
20563051221086241. 
Bloomfield, J., Steward, F., 2022. Strategies for climate change post COP26. Polit. Q. 93 
(2), 278–287. 
Bloomfield, E.F., Van Swol, L.M., Chang, C.T., Willes, S., Ahn, P.H., 2020. The effects of 
establishing intimacy and consubstantiality on group discussions about climate 
change solutions. Sci. Commun. 42 (3), 369–394. 
Boykoff, M.T., 2011. Who Speaks for the Climate?: Making Sense of Media Reporting on 
Climate Change. Cambridge University Press. 
Boykoff, M., Osnes, B., 2019. A laughing matter? Confronting climate change through 
humor. Polit. Geogr. 68, 154–163. 
Boykoff, M., Katzung, J., Nacu-Schmidt, A, Pearman, O., 2022. A Review of Media 
Coverage of Climate Change and Global Warming in 2021. Media and Climate 
Change Observatory. Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences, 
University of Colorado. (Accessed 13 July 2023). 
Brennan, M.A., Dolan, P., Odera, E., 2022. From regiments and radicals: the critical need 
for empowering youth as radical agents of change. Educ. Citizen Soc. Justice 17 (3), 
210–223. 
Brownlie, J., Shaw, F., 2019. Empathy rituals: small conversations about emotional 
distress on Twitter. Sociology 53 (1), 104–122. 
Bruce, Analena B., 2019. Farm entry and persistence: three pathways into alternative 
agriculture in southern Ohio. J. Rural Stud. 69, 30–40. 
Chang, C.H., Armsworth, P.R., Masuda, Y.J., 2022. Environmental discourse exhibits 
consistency and variation across spatial scales on twitter. Bioscience 72 (8), 
789–797. 
Chapman, D.A., Lickel, B., Markowitz, E.M., 2017. Reassessing emotion in climate 
change communication. Nat. Clim. Change 7 (12), 850–852. 
Chen, C.W.Y., 2018. Developing EFL students’ digital empathy through video 
production. System 77, 50–57. 
Clair, J.A., Dufresne, R.L., 2004. Playing the grim reaper: how employees experience 
carrying out a downsizing. Human relations 57 (12), 1597–1625. 
Crippa, M., Solazzo, E., Guizzardi, D., Monforti-Ferrario, F., Tubiello, F.N., Leip, A.J.N.F., 
2021. Food systems are responsible for a third of global anthropogenic GHG 
emissions. Nature Food 2 (3), 198–209. 
Colvin, R.M., Kemp, L., Talberg, A., De Castella, C., Downie, C., Friel, S., et al., 2020. 
Learning from the climate change debate to avoid polarisation on negative 
emissions. Environmental Communication 14 (1), 23–35. 
Conner, J., 2021. What Impact Did COP26 Have on Public Opinion? YouGov. (Accessed 
13 July 2023). 
Daiute, C., 2013. Narrative Inquiry: A Dynamic Approach. Sage Publications. 
Davis, M.H., 1980. A multidimensional approach to individual differences in empathy. 
JSAS Catalog of Selected Documents in Psychology 10, 85. 
Deri, S., Rappaz, J., Aiello, L.M., Quercia, D., 2018. Coloring in the links: capturing social 
ties as they are perceived. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 
2, 1–18. CSCW.  
Ettinger, J., McGivern, A., Spiegel, M.P., et al., 2023. Breaking the climate spiral of 
silence: lessons from a COP26 climate conversations campaign. Climatic Change 176 
(3), 22. 
Ettinger, J., Walton, P., Painter, J., DiBlasi, T., 2021. Climate of hope or doom and 
gloom? Testing the climate change hope vs. fear communications debate through 
online videos. Climatic Change 164 (1–2), 19. 
Fiala, V., Freyer, B., Bingen, J., 2021. Environmentally sound agriculture between 
transformation and conformation: the changing portrayal of the growing organic 
farming movement in Austria’s newspaper coverage. Environmental Communication 
15 (4), 495–513. 
Friesem, E., 2016. Empathy for the digital age: using video production to enhance social, 
emotional, and cognitive skills. Emotions, technology, and behaviors 21–45. 
Getson, J.M., Church, S.P., Radulski, B.G., Sj¨ostrand, A.E., Lu, J., Prokopy, L.S., 2022. 
Understanding scientists’ communication challenges at the intersection of climate 
and agriculture. PLoS One 17 (8), e0269927. 
Geiger, N., Swim, J.K., 2016. Climate of silence: pluralistic ignorance as a barrier to 
climate change discussion. J. Environ. Psychol. 47, 79–90. 
Habibi, S.A., Salim, L., 2021. Static vs. dynamic methods of delivery for science 
communication: a critical analysis of user engagement with science on social media. 
PLoS One 16 (3), e0248507. 
Hale, B.J., Collins, R., Brown, D.K., 2020. Posting about cancer: predicting social support 
in Imgur comments. Social Media+ Society 6 (4), 1–14. 
Hatfield, J.L., Boote, K.J., Kimball, B.A., Ziska, L.H., Izaurralde, R.C., Ort, D., 
Thomson, A.M., Wolfe, D., 2011. Climate impacts on agriculture: implications for 
crop production. Agronomy journal 103 (2), 351–370. 
Hautea, S., Parks, P., Takahashi, B., Zeng, J., 2021. Showing they care (or don’t): 
affective publics and ambivalent climate activism on TikTok. Social media+ society 
7 (2), 1–14. 
Hayhoe, K., 2021. Saving Us: A Climate Scientist’s Case for Hope and Healing in a 
Divided World. Simon and Schuster. 
Hobson, K., Niemeyer, S., 2013. What sceptics believe”: the effects of information and 
deliberation on climate change scepticism. Publ. Understand. Sci. 22 (4), 396–412. 
Kaltenbacher, M., Drews, S., 2020. An inconvenient joke? A review of humor in climate 
change communication. Environmental Communication 14 (6), 717–729. 
Kovacheva, A., Wiener, H.J., Kareklas, I., Muehling, D., 2022. Online engagement with 
memes and comments about climate change. Sustainability 14 (14), 8900. 
Kozinets, R.V., Gambetti, R., 2021. Netnography Unlimited: Understanding 
Technoculture Using Qualitative Social Media Research. Routledge, London.  
Liu, B.F., Kim, J., 2021. Social media and climate change dialogue: A review of the 
research and guidance for science communicators. In: Yusuf, Juita-Elena (Wie), John 
III, Burton St. (Eds.), Communicating Climate Change. Routledge, London, 
pp. 97–115. 
Lovell, D., Dolamore, S., Collins, H., 2022. Examining public organization 
communication misalignments during COVID-19 through the lens of higher 
education. Adm. Soc. 54 (2), 212–247. 
Masambuka-Kanchewa, F., Rumble, J., Buck, E., 2021. Exploring differences in 
communication behaviors between organic and conventional farmers. J Agri Food 
Sys Comm Dev 10 (3), 205–219. 
Matarrita-Cascante, D., Brennan, M.A., 2012. Conceptualizing community development 
in the twenty-frist century. J. Vocat. Technol. Educ. 43 (3), 293–305. 
Manzo, K., 2012. Earthworks: the geopolitical visions of climate change cartoons. Polit. 
Geogr. 31 (8), 481–494. 
Meijers, M.H.C., Remmelswaal, P., Wonneberger, A., 2019. Using visual impact 
metaphors to stimulate environmentally friendly behavior: the roles of response 
efficacy and evaluative persuasion knowledge. Environmental Communication 13 
(8), 995–1008. 
Moernaut, R., Mast, J., Temmerman, M., Broersma, M., 2022. Hot weather, hot topic. 
Polarization and sceptical framing in the climate debate on Twitter. Inf. Commun. 
Soc. 25 (8), 1047–1066. 
Moret-Soler, D., Mateu, A., Domínguez, M., 2022. Incendiary humor: climate change, 
biodiversity, and politics in wildfire cartoons. Environmental Communication 16 (3), 
296–303. 
McBeth, M.K., Lybecker, D.L., Sargent, J.M., 2022. Narrative empathy: a narrative policy 
framework study of working-class climate change narratives and narrators. World 
Aff. 185 (3), 471–499. 
Odera, E., Brennan, M., Dolan, P., Davis, J., 2022. Enhancing research and practice: 
understanding paths and options for youth citizenship and social justice. Educ. 
Citizen Soc. Justice 17 (3), 224–234. 
Olausson, U., 2018. Stop blaming the cows!”: how livestock production is legitimized in 
everyday discourse on Facebook.  Environmental Communication 12 (1), 28–43. 
Park, C.S., Liu, Q., Kaye, B.K., 2021. Analysis of ageism, sexism, and ableism in user 
comments on YouTube videos about climate activist Greta Thunberg. Social Media+
Society 7 (3), 1–14. 
Pearce, W., Niederer, S., ¨Ozkula, S.M., S´anchez Querubín, N., 2019. The social media life 
of climate change: platforms, publics, and future imaginaries. Wiley interdisciplinary 
reviews: Clim. Change 10 (2), e569. 
Petril’´ak, M., Janˇsto, E., Horsk´a, E., 2020. Communication of local farmers’ products 
through Facebook: the case study of Nase-vase. Commun. Today 11 (1), 150–163. 
Radin, A.G., Light, C.J., 2022. TikTok: an emergent opportunity for teaching and 
learning science communication online. J. Microbiol. Biol. Educ. 23 (1), e00236-21. 
Ramsey, A., 2021. In: World Leaders Failed Us at COP26. But Change Doesn’t Come from 
Glitzy Conferences [online], open- Democracy. https://www.opendemocracy.net/en 
/why-cop26-gave-me-hope. (Accessed 19 March 2023). 
˙I. Unay-Gailhard et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         


Journal of Rural Studies 102 (2023) 103075
13
Ravishankar, M.N., 2021. Social innovations and the fight against poverty: an analysis of 
India’s first prosocial P2P lending platform. Inf. Syst. J. 31 (5), 745–766. 
Redden, S., Way, A.K., 2017. ‘Adults don’t understand’: exploring how teens use 
dialectical frameworks to navigate webs of tensions in online life. J. Appl. Commun. 
Res. 45 (1), 21–41. 
Riley, M., Robertson, B., 2021. # farming365–Exploring farmers’ social media use and 
the (re) presentation of farming lives. J. Rural Stud. 87, 99–111. 
Riley, M., Robertson, B., 2022. The virtual good farmer: farmers’ use of social media and 
the (re) presentation of “good farming”. Sociol. Rural. 62 (3), 437–458. 
Rotz, S., 2018. Drawing lines in the cornfield: an analysis of discourse and identity 
relations across agri-food networks. Agric. Hum. Val. 35 (2), 441–456. 
Russell, C., Chandler, P., Dillon, J., 2023. Humour and environmental education. 
Environ. Educ. Res. 29 (4), 491–499. 
Salda˜na, J., 2021. The Coding Manual of Qualitative Researchers, fourth ed. Sage 
Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.  
Sanford, M., Witkowska, M., Gifford, R., Formanowicz, M., 2023. Emotional framing in 
online environmental activism: pairing a Twitter study with an offline experiment. 
Front. Psychol. 13, 1099331. 
Sharma, A., Lin, I.W., Miner, A.S., Atkins, D.C., Althoff, T., 2021. April. Towards 
facilitating empathic conversations in online mental health support: a reinforcement 
learning approach. In: Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021, pp. 194–205. 
Sharma, A., Miner, A.S., Atkins, D.C., Althoff, T., 2020. A computational approach to 
understanding empathy expressed in text-based mental health support. In: 
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing. ACL, pp. 5263–5276. 
Sorvali, J., Kaseva, J., Peltonen-Sainio, P., 2021. Farmer views on climate change—a 
longitudinal study of threats, opportunities and action. Climatic Change 164, 1–19. 
Sperandeo, R., Cioffi, V., Mosca, L.L., Longobardi, T., Moretto, E., Alfano, Y.M., 
Scandurra, C., Muzii, B., Cantone, D., Guerriera, C., Architravo, M., 2021. Exploring 
the question:“Does empathy work in the same way in online and in-person 
therapeutic settings?”. Front. Psychol. 12, 671790. 
Stevens, T.M., Aarts, N., Termeer, C.J.A.M., Dewulf, A., 2016. Social media as a new 
playing field for the governance of agro-food sustainability. Curr. Opin. Environ. 
Sustain. 18, 99–106. 
Stevens, T.M., Aarts, N., Termeer, C.J.A.M., Dewulf, A., 2018. Social media hypes about 
agro-food issues: activism, scandals and conflicts. Food Pol. 79, 23–34. 
Swim, J.K., Bloodhart, B., 2015. Portraying the perils to polar bears: the role of empathic 
and objective perspective-taking toward animals in climate change communication. 
Environmental Communication 9 (4), 446–468. 
Tam, K.P., 2013. Dispositional empathy with nature. J. Environ. Psychol. 35, 92–104. 
Tan, K.H., Rajendran, A., Muslim, N., Alias, J., Yusof, N.A., 2022. The potential of 
TikTok’s key features as a pedagogical strategy for ESL classrooms. Sustainability 14 
(24), 16876. 
Telg, R., Wandersee, C., Smith, D., Mukhtar, S., 2020. Engaging in conversations about 
climate change with cattle producers. J Human Sci Ex 8 (1), 3. 
Terry, C., Cain, J., 2016. The emerging issue of digital empathy. Am. J. Pharmaceut. 
Educ. 80 (4). 
Thornberg, R., Charmaz, K., 2014. Grounded theory and theoretical coding. The SAGE 
handbook of qualitative data analysis 5 (2014), 153–169. 
Topp, K., Thai, M., Hryciw, D.H., 2019. The role of entertainment in engagement with 
climate change. Environ. Educ. Res. 25 (5), 691–700. 
Tuitjer, L., Dirksmeier, P., Mewes, L., 2022. Geographies of climate change opinion. Geo 
Com 16 (5), e12619. 
UN, 2022. COP26: together for our planet [online]. https://www.un.org/en/climatechan 
ge/cop26#:~:text=The%20UN%20Climate%20Change%20Conference,observers% 
20and%203.886%20media%20representatives. (Accessed 19 March 2023). 
Unay-Gailhard, I., Bojnec, ˇS., 2021. Gender and the environmental concerns of young 
farmers: do young women farmers make a difference on family farms? J. Rural Stud. 
88, 71–82. 
Unay-Gailhard, ˙I., Sim˜oes, F., 2022. Becoming a young farmer in the digital age—an 
island perspective. Rural Sociol. 87 (1), 144–185. 
Unay-Gailhard, ˙I., Brennan, M.A., 2023. Young farmers in “The New World of Work”: the 
contribution of new media to the work engagement and professional identities. Rural 
Sociol. 88 (2), 426–460. 
van der Ploeg, J.D., 2020. Farmers’ upheaval, climate crisis and populism. J. Peasant 
Stud. 47 (3), 589–605. 
van Swol, L.M., Bloomfield, E.F., Chang, C.T., Willes, S., 2022. Fostering climate change 
consensus: the role of intimacy in group discussions. Publ. Understand. Sci. 31 (1), 
103–118. 
Wambsganss, T., Niklaus, C., S¨ollner, M., Handschuh, S., Leimeister, J.M., 2021. 
Supporting cognitive and emotional empathic writing of students. In: Proceedings of 
the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 
11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, ume 1. https:// 
doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.314. Long Papers), pages 4063–4077, Online. 
Association for Computational Linguistics. (Accessed 13 July 2023). 
Wilke, A.K., Morton, L.W., 2015. Climatologists’ communication of climate science to the 
agricultural sector. Sci. Commun. 37 (3), 371–395. 
Xu, X., Sharma, P., Shu, S., Lin, T.S., Ciais, P., Tubiello, F.N., Smith, P., Campbell, N., 
Jain, A.K., 2021. Global greenhouse gas emissions from animal-based foods are twice 
those of plant-based foods. Nature Food 2 (9), 724–732. 
Zawacki, E.E., Bohon, W., Johnson, S., Charlevoix, D.J., 2022. Exploring TikTok as a 
promising platform for geoscience communication. Geosci Comm 5 (4), 363–380. 
Zhou, N., Jurgens, D., 2020. Condolence and empathy in online communities. In: 
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing (EMNLP. ACL, pp. 609–626. 
˙I. Unay-Gailhard et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
