ARTICLE
Climate delay discourses present in global
mainstream television coverage of the IPCC’s 2021
report
James Painter
1,2✉, Joshua Ettinger2, David Holmes3, Loredana Loy
4, Janaina Pinto5, Lucy Richardson
3,
Laura Thomas-Walters6, Kjell Vowles7 & Rachel Wetts8
Recent scholarship suggests that groups who oppose acting on climate change have shifted
their emphasis from attacking the credibility of climate science itself to questioning the
policies intended to address it, a position often called ‘response skepticism’. As television is
the platform most used by audiences around the world to receive climate information, we
examine 30 news programmes on 20 channels in Australia, Brazil, Sweden, the UK and USA
which included coverage of the 2021 report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) on the Physical Science. Using manual quantitative content analysis, we ﬁnd
that skepticism about the science of climate change is still prevalent in channels that we have
classiﬁed as ‘right-wing’, but largely absent from channels classiﬁed as ‘mainstream’. Forms
of response skepticism are particularly common in ‘right-wing’ channels, but also present in
some ‘mainstream’ coverage. Two of the most prominent discourses question the perceived
economic costs of taking action and the personal sacriﬁces involved. We explore the
implications of our ﬁndings for future research and climate communication.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00760-2
OPEN
1 Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism, University of Oxford, 13 Norham Gardens, Oxford OX2 6PS, UK. 2 School of Geography and Environment,
University of Oxford, S Parks Rd, Oxford OX1 3QY, UK. 3 Communication and Media Studies, Monash University, 900 Dandenong Road, Wurundjeri and
Boonwurrung Country, Caulﬁeld East, VIC 3145, Australia. 4 Department of Sociology, Cornell University, 323 Uris Hall, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.
5 Interdisciplinary Observatory on Climate Change, Institute of Social and Political Studies, State University of Rio de Janeiro, 82 Rua da Matriz, Botafogo, Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil. 6 ConFooBio, University of Stirling, Stirling FK9 4LA Scotland, UK. 7 Division of Science Technology and Society, Department of Technology,
Management and Economics, Chalmers University of Technology, 412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden. 8 Department of Sociology and Institute at Brown for
Environment and Society, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912, USA. ✉email: james.painter@politics.ox.ac.uk
COMMUNICATIONS EARTH & ENVIRONMENT |  (2023) 4:118 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00760-2 | www.nature.com/commsenv
1
1234567890():,;


S
ince the 1980s, efforts to prevent action to address climate
change have primarily focused on undermining public
conﬁdence in the scientiﬁc consensus that the climate is
changing in response to human action, often by “manufacturing
uncertainty”1,2. Many of these efforts have focused on denying
the reality, anthropogenic causes, and/or seriousness of climate
change—that is, promoting what many scholars have called trend
skepticism,
attribution
skepticism,
or
impact
skepticism,
respectively3,4. However, recent research suggests that the
emphasis may be shifting from questioning the scientiﬁc basis of
climate change to undermining policy solutions deemed capable
of addressing climate change5. Here, we assess the current
manifestations of different types of climate skepticism through an
examination of television coverage of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change’s (IPCC) 2021 Working Group I (WGI)
report on Physical Science in ﬁve countries around the world.
One strand of scholarship6 has deﬁned efforts to deny the
reality of the physical phenomenon of climate change as “evi-
dence skepticism,” and has contrasted this with two other forms
of climate skepticism—“process” and “response skepticism”—
which are “commensurate with but not dependent on evidence
skepticism” (p. 6). Examples of “process skepticism” are sugges-
tions that scientists are manipulating or hiding evidence, com-
puter modeling is unreliable, media exaggeration is affecting
public opinion, or that scientiﬁc institutions such as the IPCC
lack integrity7.
“Response skepticism” dismisses or contests policies to address
the climate challenge. It includes a variety of arguments, such as
taking action will harm the economy and jobs, or that unilateral
responses are not appropriate in the absence of a global agree-
ment, or that a measured response is best6. We follow this broad
taxonomy of skepticism, although we acknowledge that different
categories of skepticism are possible8,9, and other scholars prefer
different nomenclature such as “contrarianism” or “denialism”10.
We also distinguish below between what we call general response
skepticism, often advanced by organized skeptical groups1,11–13,
and “directed” response skepticism, where a speciﬁc policy
response is portrayed as inadequate for a variety of reasons.
While debating policy dimensions of climate action remains a
legitimate and important societal discussion, this range of skep-
tical discourses has been promulgated in some countries by a
well-funded
and
well-coordinated
network
of
conservative
advocacy organizations, foundations, and think tanks which
scholars have argued is aimed at delaying climate action14–17.
Although evidence skepticism has been notably prevalent in the
media, since its beginnings, this network has not only cast doubt
on the science of climate change but also made the argument that
solutions would be expensive and/or ineffective1,17,18. In addition,
businesses and corporate think tanks have at times signaled
support for policies to address the changing climate, but in ways
that maintain existing political and economic power relations or
that do not address the scale of the problem, thereby delaying
meaningful action by pushing non-transformative solutions19–21.
Some scholars have called this “climate obstruction”22 or “dis-
courses of delay”19. Detailed typologies of the wide range of
discourses and claims that underpin climate delay have been
identiﬁed by previous research; they include the arguments that
climate solutions would not work, someone else should take
action ﬁrst, or disruptive change is not necessary9,19.
Recent research has found signs that the relative prevalence of
these arguments may be shifting among key portions of the cli-
mate change countermovement described above, with evidence
skepticism declining and attempts to undercut solutions becom-
ing more prominent among conservative think tanks and con-
trarian blogs9. Similarly, the prevalence of these arguments in US
media sources may be shifting as well5. Moreover, by 2019 much
less space was being given to those denying the science of climate
change in newspaper outlets in Australia, Canada, New Zealand,
the UK and the USA, except in some titles researchers describe as
having a right-leaning political orientation in their coverage23,
and more context has been included to explain the lack of sci-
entiﬁc support for their views24.
To examine the relative prevalence of these forms of skepticism
in media treatments, we focus on the IPCC’s WGI Report, which
was launched on August 9, 2021. The IPCC is widely regarded as
the most authoritative source on climate change, its impacts, and
options for tackling rising emissions25. IPCC reports play a
central role in summarizing and presenting climate science,
creating media coverage, and affecting public awareness, and
exert a wide-ranging inﬂuence on how climate science interacts
with policy26,27. However, research has highlighted that past
IPCC Assessments, and particularly WGI reports on physical
science, have been subject to various forms of contestation. For
example, the 2013 WGI of the IPCC’s Fifth Assessment Report
(AR5) was often contested and politicized in television and print
reporting in the US and UK26. One of the main frames identiﬁed
was “Uncertain Science,” which included uncertainty about
aspects of the science, impacts and solutions, and another was
“Political and Ideological Struggle” which included conﬂict over
how to address climate change.
At the same time, there have been marked country differences
in the extent of the various forms of skepticism both in general
climate change coverage, and in response to previous IPCC
reports. Evidence skeptics, deﬁned above, have been notably
present in the media in Anglosphere countries (such as the US,
UK and Australia), but much less present in other countries in
continental Europe and the Global South (including Brazil)28. A
six-country study of the television coverage of the AR5 report
showed a large presence of skeptics on air in some countries (the
UK and Australia) but not in others (Brazil, China, Germany and
India)29. In addition, the uncertainty frame was present in nearly
90% of the print media reporting of the IPCC’s 2007 AR4 reports,
but countries varied in whether they featured the different types
of skeptics30. The USA had the highest percentage of articles with
skeptics in them (41% of all articles), followed by Australia (37%)
and the UK (34%). By contrast, India had none, and Norway very
few (3% of articles).
Whereas researchers have been able to map the geographic
location of different types of skeptics accurately in the media, the
main drivers of their presence or absence are less clear. It is likely
to be an interaction between internal factors such as media sys-
tems, journalistic practice (such as balance), the inﬂuence of
owners, and a media outlet’s ideology, and external political and
cultural factors such as the presence of organized skepticism
through lobbying groups or think tanks, the inﬂuence of com-
panies with an interest in delaying climate action, and the pre-
sence of politicians or scientists, who have publically expressed
that they are skeptical of the science of climate change and who
have access to the media31–35. However, it is clear that in most
countries, it is in news outlets with a right-wing readership and/or
a right-wing political slant to their coverage where the different
forms of skepticism we have outlined above are much more
prevalent36–40.
The IPCC AR6 WGI Report41, known formally as the “AR6
Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis,” was based on
14,000 peer-reviewed articles giving updated research on the
climate system. A total of 234 authors from 66 countries took
part. In the headline statements from the Summary for Policy-
makers (SPM) the IPCC stressed the need to make “strong, rapid,
and sustained reductions” in greenhouse gas emissions42.
We focus on television coverage of the report because it has
historically been neglected in media studies of climate change
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS EARTH & ENVIRONMENT | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00760-2
2
COMMUNICATIONS EARTH & ENVIRONMENT |  (2023) 4:118 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00760-2 | www.nature.com/commsenv


when compared to other platforms43, despite evidence from
extensive survey work in over 40 countries that television pro-
grams are by far the most used source of information on climate
compared to online news, print, or radio44. We also respond to
the call for more comparative studies45 particularly including
countries in the Global South, by examining the presence and
nature of skepticism in television coverage of the report in Aus-
tralia, Brazil, Sweden, the UK and the USA. This gave us the
opportunity both to enlarge the sample of programs and to add to
the literature on the presence or absence of skeptics in coverage
across different countries.
The target countries were selected to allow comparison of
countries with diverse histories of skepticism and recent political
shifts. Australia, the UK and the USA are three Anglosphere
countries where forms of evidence skepticism have been con-
sistently prevalent in the media and wider public sphere11,35,46.
Brazil was chosen because, whereas in the past, there has been
little evidence of any of the types of skepticism discussed above47,
the overall political and media context changed with the election
of President Jair Bolsonaro in January 201948,49. Similarly, Swe-
den was included because historically the various forms of climate
skepticism have not been present in the media or main political
parties, but the Sweden Democrats have gained considerable
electoral support since 2010. The party is usually described by
scholars as radical right-wing or far-right because they espouse
policies which are considerably to the right of Sweden’s tradi-
tional conservative parties50. Representatives of the party have
repeatedly made statements that fall into the category of evidence
and response skepticism51. In addition, there has been a marked
change in the Swedish media landscape with the emergence of
what scholars describe as right-wing alternative digital media52,
including an online web-based channel called SwebbTV, which
regularly gives space to climate skepticism53.
We chose four television stations, networks or web-based
channels for each of the ﬁve countries. In each country, we
classiﬁed three as being broadly in the center of the political
spectrum or non-aligned public service broadcasters governed
and regulated for impartiality (see Table 1). Some we classiﬁed as
“center-right” or “center-left” by which we meant that these
stations leaned to the right or left of the political spectrum, by
some criteria, but were closer to the center than “left-wing” or
“right-wing” channels. For brevity, we call this group of stations
“mainstream.” The fourth channel in each country we classiﬁed
as “right-wing,” embracing a range of stations on the conservative
end of the political spectrum, namely Sky News in Australia, Rede
TV! in Brazil, SwebbTV in Sweden, GBTV news in the UK, and
Fox News in the USA. The allocation of political labels was based
on a variety of criteria outlined in detail in the Methods Section
and described in the Supplementary Notes, but particularly the
composition of viewers, the slant of news coverage, the regular
presence or absence of voices or arguments expressing the dif-
ferent types of skepticism outlined above, and the political clas-
siﬁcations of these channels in prior studies35,54,55. For purposes
of brevity, we call these stations “right-wing.” We recognize our
labels are approximations and can be contested.
For each of the mainstream channels, we ﬁrst looked at news
programs across three days, i.e., August 8, 9 and 10, and normally
evening programs at peak viewing times. This gave us an initial
total of nearly 70 programs across the ﬁve countries to examine,
consisting of more than 40 h of content. For the right-wing
channels, the selection method differed according to country and
platform speciﬁcs (see Methods section). However, only a few of
the initial sample of programs reported on the IPCC report, so
following previous research26, we included only those programs
which contained within them items that were substantively about
the IPCC report. This selection method meant, for example, that
Brazil only had four programs to analyze, whereas Sky News in
Australia alone had three different programs included in our
sample.
Table 1 gives details of the 20 channels and 30 programs
analyzed in the ﬁve countries, which included IPCC coverage. We
deﬁned 19 of the programs as “mainstream,” and 11 as “right-
wing.” In all, 221 min of programming were included in our
sample, which compares favorably with the volume and number
of programs monitored in previous studies of IPCC television
coverage26,29.
First, we assessed the newsworthiness of the IPCC report,
measured by the volume of coverage. Then we concentrated on
three key aspects of the contestation around it: the forms of
contestation; the on-air presence of skeptics, including what type
of skeptical views they presented such as evidence or response
skepticism and which sector they came from (e.g., university
scientist, lobbyist, media pundit); and the relative presence of
contestation compared to other prominent discourses promoted
by the IPCC and other UN bodies around the report (see
Table 2). The forms of contestation are anchored in the distinc-
tions outlined above between the various manifestations of “evi-
dence skepticism” (such as questioning the trend of temperatures
rising, attribution to human activities, or the magnitude of the
impacts) and “response skepticism” (such as the high costs of
taking action or the cost falling unfairly on lower-income groups)
(see Table 3). We further divided the category of response
skepticism into (a) “general response skepticism” where policy
solutions appear to be criticized or deemed impossible to achieve
in general without any clear alternatives pointed to or advanced,
which scholars have characterized as “discourses of delay” often
put forward by organized skeptical groups19 and (b) “directed
response skepticism” where a speciﬁc policy is critiqued for being
insufﬁcient in scope and scale to address the climate problem, or
unrealistic due to political and other obstacles.
Results
Newsworthiness of report. Most of the coverage (25 of the 30
programs) was focused on the day of the launch of the report
(August 9), rather than the day before or after. The British
channels we monitored covered the report the most on these
dates (72 min), followed by Sweden (58), Australia (40) and USA
(39). Brazil was the clear outlier with only 12 min across the four
channels chosen. This relative silence was particularly apparent
on some of Brazil’s center-right and right-wing channels.
Of the mainstream channels in Australia, ABC was the only
station to cover the report in some depth, whereas Channels 7
and 9 had very limited coverage in the programs we monitored;
instead of the report itself, they concentrated on former Prime
Minister Scott Morrison’s speech on August 9 in response to the
report, which focused primarily on climate policy. In the US, the
amount of coverage of the report on Fox News was minimal, with
12 of the 14 programs we examined showing no coverage at all.
These included some of the most-watched programs on cable
news (Tucker Carlson Tonight and Hannity). The two programs
which did contain coverage of the report had only relatively brief
segments (about 3 min or less). One of the two shows that did
cover the report, Fox News Primetime, began its reporting on
August 9 at 4 pm Paciﬁc time by framing climate change as
unimportant, saying “Democrats are working hard to ignore real
issues affecting Americans, instead choosing to focus on climate
change.” These samples from Brazil and the USA in particular
suggest a form of “denialism by silence,” discussed below.
General contestation around the report. General criticism of the
IPCC report and contestation around the science was largely
COMMUNICATIONS EARTH & ENVIRONMENT | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00760-2
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS EARTH & ENVIRONMENT |  (2023) 4:118 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00760-2 | www.nature.com/commsenv
3


absent from the mainstream media coverage, but strongly present
in the right-wing coverage (see Fig. 1). The report was criticized
only twice in the mainstream coverage, once on SVT1 on August
10 in Sweden for “underestimating the temperature rise,” and
once on Channel 4 in the UK, which mildly criticized the report
(in the questioning by the presenter) for claiming that it “said
nothing new.” The same Channel 4 program also brieﬂy con-
tested the science by saying the IPCC report was overusing the
most extreme (and least likely) scenarios. The SVT1 program
mentioned above also criticized the science of the report, based
on two interviews with climate scientists saying that a 1.5-degree
increase was inevitable due to feedback from melting permafrost
and forest ﬁres not included in the IPCC models, and that reli-
ance on negative emissions was unwise. The argumentation here
was that more up-to-date scientiﬁc results were available than
those used by the IPCC, rather than that the IPCC had produced
an inaccurate or invalid report.
By contrast, in right-wing coverage, 7 of the 11 programs we
monitored included criticism of the report in general, and 8
included questioning of the science. Of these 8 (representing 73%
of the right-wing programs), one included a denial of the
warming trend, and four questioned the attribution to human
Table 1 Television channels and programs monitored, by country and political leaning.
Country
Channel
Type of channel
Political
leaning
Program
Date of
transmission
Australia
ABC1 Sydney
Public sector
broadcaster
Center-left
7.30 report
August 9
Ch 7 Sydney
Commercial
Center-right
7 News
August 10
Ch 9 Sydney
Commercial
Center-left
9 News
August 10
Sky News
Cable, commercial
Right-wing
Sky News Extra
August 8
Sky News
Cable, commercial
Right-wing
Credlin
August 9
Sky News
Cable, commercial
Right-wing
Afternoon Agenda
August 10
Brazil
Globo
Commercial
Centrist
Jornal Nacional
August 9
SBT
Commercial
Center-right
SBT Brasil
August 9
Record
Commercial
Center-right
Jornal da Record
August 9
Rede TV!
Commercial
Right-wing
Rede TV! News
August 9
Sweden
SVT1
Public sector
broadcaster
Non-aligned
Rapport [Report]
August 9
SVT1
Public sector
broadcaster
Non-aligned
Rapport [Report]
August 10
SVT2
Public sector
broadcaster
Non-aligned
Aktuellt [Current]
August 9
TV4
Commercial
Non-aligned
Nyheterna [News]
August 9
SwebbTV
Web-based
Right-wing
SwebbTV Nyheter [SwebbTV News]
August 9
SwebbTV
Web-based
Right-wing
Återpublicering med anledning av gårdagens
skrämselpropaganda i SVT Rapport
August 10
UK
BBC1
Public sector
broadcaster
Non-aligned
News at Ten
August 9
ITV news
Commercial
Non-aligned
News at 6
August 9
Channel 4
Public sector
broadcaster
Non-aligned
Channel 4 News
August 9
GBTV
Commercial
Right-wing
Farage
August 9
GBTV
Commercial
Right-wing
The Clash
August 9
GBTV
Commercial
Right-wing
GB News
August 9
USA
MSNBC
Cable, commercial
Center-left
The Rachel Maddow Show
August 9
MSNBC
Cable, commercial
Center-left
The ReidOut
August 9
MSNBC
Cable, commercial
Center-left
All In with Chris Hayes
August 9
MSNBC
Cable, commercial
Center-left
Last Word with Lawrence O’Donnell
August 9
NBC
Network
Centrist
NBC Nightly News
August 9
ABC
Network
Centrist
World News Tonight
August 9
Fox
Cable, commercial
Right-wing
Special Report with Bret Baier
August 9
Fox
Cable, commercial
Right-wing
Fox News Primetime
August 9
Table 2 Main IPCC messages coded.
1. Stark warning from scientists/“code red,” highlighting need for urgent action
2. (More) Certainty about the science
3. Climate change is happening now (in many parts of the world) and/or irreversible
4. Human inﬂuence is making extreme climate events, including heat waves, heavy rainfall, and droughts, more frequent and severe
5. Climate change is causing impacts other than extreme climate events, e.g., sea level rise
6. Uncertainty (possible ranges) about the scenarios, e.g., warming trajectories, sea level rise
7. Reasons for hope (general), such as the IPCC view that it is not too late to stop the worst effects of climate change
8. Opportunity for a better world/green recovery based on clean, renewable resources; or mention of speciﬁc examples of green alternatives
9. Role of methane in causing global warming
10. Other
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS EARTH & ENVIRONMENT | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00760-2
4
COMMUNICATIONS EARTH & ENVIRONMENT |  (2023) 4:118 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00760-2 | www.nature.com/commsenv


action. The most common (7 mentions) was impact skepticism,
in which scientists or NGOs were accused of “climate alarmism”
in exaggerating the possible impacts (and in some cases
“traumatizing children” according to a presenter on GBTV).
On Sky News, the view was voiced that climate alarmism was
causing more anxiety when Australians were already stressed over
COVID, while on SwebbTV, one of the programs described a
report on SVT (the public service channel) the previous night as
being too alarmist about the impacts. On August 9, the day the
report was published, SwebbTV ran a segment on climate science
that did not mention the IPCC, but instead reported on new
monthly data from the University of Alabama satellite measure-
ment series, a series which has previously understated warming
and has often been used in skeptical argumentation56. On Fox
News Primetime there were explicit statements that the science
underlying the IPCC was “corrupt” or “bureaucratic,” including
the statement from a contributor that “over 50 percent of the
report [was] based on implausible extreme model-based scenarios
of doom, because they could not ﬁnd current reality to scare
people.”
Response skepticism. Within the mainstream channels, the
skeptical discourses that appeared were predominantly those
around response skepticism (10 of 19 programs—53%), but
within the right-wing media, there was an equally strong presence
of evidence skepticism and response skepticism (8 out of 11
programs each—73%). Of the ten times response skepticism was
present within the mainstream media, eight were examples of
“directed response skepticism,” where aspects of particular
national policies were criticized, rather than a general rejection of
taking climate action. In contrast, “directed response skepticism”
was only present twice in the right-wing sample, meaning that
response skepticism here instead mostly questioned the general
plausibility and desirability of action rather than critiquing par-
ticular policy options.
The two discourses questioning (a) the economic costs of
taking climate action (4 out of 19 programs—21%) and (b)
whether climate action would involve too much personal sacriﬁce
(4 out of 19 programs—21%) were the most commonly
mentioned in the mainstream sample. The two main discourses
on right-wing channels were economic cost (6 out of 11 programs
—55%) and questioning the need to take action when other
countries such as China were not doing enough (6 out of 11
programs—55%), often described colloquially as “whataboutism”
(see Fig. 2).
Additional discourses identiﬁed in previous studies of response
skepticism were present in low numbers or not at all. For
example, we did not ﬁnd any mention on mainstream channels of
a preference for adaptation to inevitable impacts rather than
mitigation, or claims that taking action would mean giving too
much power to governments. The impracticality of taking climate
action, such action hitting low-income groups the hardest, and
claims that enough was already being done were each mentioned
only once. For right-wing media, all varieties of response
skepticism were mentioned, but discourses aside from economic
costs and “whataboutism” were discussed on only one or two
occasions.
There were also country-level differences. In Sweden, on SVT1
and 2, although the focus was on physical science, the challenges
of adaptation and the risk of conﬂict around insurance and the
cost for loss and damage were also mentioned. In the UK
mainstream samples, there were brief mentions of the economic
cost of taking action, that too much personal sacriﬁce is needed
(giving up ﬂying or eating meat), and that policies harm low-
income groups. By contrast, in the GBTV sample, response
skepticism arguments were expressed with more frequency and at
greater length. For example, in segments aired on 9 August 2021,
the presenter states that he does not necessarily dispute that
climate change is occurring; however, he expresses a range of
response skepticism arguments, including doubts about the need
Table 3 Types of response skepticism.
Response skepticism in general questioning the need for strong regulatory policies or interventions
The impracticality of taking (urgent) action (in general, without specifying any details)
Questioning the economic costs of taking (urgent) action (in general)
Action to tackle climate change is already costing job losses or will do so in the future
Taking action would or could involve a lot of /too much personal sacriﬁce (e.g., reducing or not ﬂying, not eating/reducing meat)
Solutions will hit lower-income groups the hardest
Solutions will outsource jobs, or hurt national competitiveness
Solutions will give too much power to governments (to impose new regulations and taxes)
Questioning the need to take action when other countries (e.g., China) are not doing enough (“whataboutism”)
Enough is already being done
Technology (including Carbon Capture and Storage) should be the main element of the solution (and not so much emphasis on moving away from
fossil fuels)
Preferring adaptation to inevitable impacts rather than mitigation
Directed response skepticism, where a speciﬁc policy, often country-based, is seen as being insufﬁcient in scope and scale to address the climate
problem, or unrealistic due to political and other obstacles
Fig. 1 Presence of forms of skepticism in mainstream and right-wing
channels. Mainstream channels in blue and right-wing channels in red.
COMMUNICATIONS EARTH & ENVIRONMENT | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00760-2
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS EARTH & ENVIRONMENT |  (2023) 4:118 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00760-2 | www.nature.com/commsenv
5


for the UK to take action when China has higher greenhouse gas
emissions, the costs of taking action and that climate policies will
disproportionately impact the poor (see: https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=7kCyna3FIkQ).
In Australia, the coverage of the then Prime Minister’s policy
speech meant that several examples of response skepticism were
present on Channels 7 and 9. In that speech—popularly
summarized as “technology not taxes”—Morrison’s emphasis
was on rejecting a “carbon tax” whilst promoting ‘technology
breakthroughs’. This was in line with the Morrison government’s
Long-term Emissions Reduction Plan, which included diverse
technologies like industrial-scale hydrogen, carbon capture and
storage, and emerging technologies such as livestock feeds that
aim to reduce methane emissions57. Mention was also made of
the possible high economic and job costs of taking action,
personal sacriﬁce, and ‘whataboutism’ by implying that China’s
and developing nations’ emissions were the priority. The three
sampled evening programs from Sky network illustrated diversity
in their forms of skepticism, ranging from an attack on perceived
alarmist rhetoric (criticizing a speech by the then New Zealand
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern) in one opinion program to a
news broadcast that discussed policy responses while accepting
the science. Again, a variety of response skepticism discourses
were present.
In the US sample, both left and right-leaning outlets expressed
response skepticism. However, the varieties found in left-leaning
versus
right-wing
media
were
quite
distinct.
Left-leaning
programs
(on
MSNBC)
expressed
doubt
about
both
the
appropriateness of particular measures included in current
climate policy proposals (i.e., “directed skepticism”)—including
whether they were sufﬁcient to the scope and scale of the problem
—as well as the inability to make policy happen due to
partisanship and congressional gridlock. In contrast, right-wing
programs (on Fox News) focused on the general lifestyle
impediments that implementation of any climate policy would
mean to Americans, such as loss of individual liberties (e.g.,
having to stop ﬂying or eating meat). Taking climate action was
also equated with Marxism, and parallels were drawn between
manufacturing fear of COVID with manufacturing fear of a
climate disaster and using legislative measures implemented for
the COVID crisis to covertly implement measures to address
climate change. On ABC and NBC, there was no expression of
either evidence or response skepticism. In Brazil, there was little
evidence of any type of skeptical discourse, due mainly to the lack
of airtime given to the report, except for two examples of
“directed response skepticism” on O Globo where a Brazilian
scientist and IPCC author criticized the government for its
inadequate policies on green energy (and deforestation); and on
SBT, the news reporter criticized governments and the public for
not giving recycling policies enough attention as an important
action to tackle climate change.
Presence of skeptics on air. Climate skeptical voices (explicitly
expressing general response skepticism) were present on screen
in only two of the mainstream programs. Both instances were
of former Australian Prime Minister Morrison (on Channels 7
and 9), whose climate change mitigation policies illustrated
response skepticism rather than climate science or evidence
skepticism. His government focused on emissions reduction
but avoided the need for new policies, and has persisted with
fossil fuel energy sources despite expert advice highlighting the
insufﬁciency of current emissions reduction policies58. In
contrast, in the right-wing programs, evidence and response
skepticism were expressed in 8 of 11 programs (73%) (see
Fig. 3). Those expressing evidence skepticism were present on
air in seven of these programs, and those expressing response
skepticism were present in six programs. In most cases, it was
the anchor or reporter who voiced skeptical discourses and not
invited guests. Skeptical views were expressed by guests in only
two programs in our sample, both of them on Fox News. In one
program, this included evidence skepticism (questioning the
role of climate change in extreme weather events) and response
skepticism (suggesting taking action will hurt US competi-
tiveness). In the other program, evidence skepticism was
expressed.
Fig. 2 Types of response skepticism in mainstream and right-wing channels. Mainstream channels in blue and right-wing channels in red.
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS EARTH & ENVIRONMENT | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00760-2
6
COMMUNICATIONS EARTH & ENVIRONMENT |  (2023) 4:118 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00760-2 | www.nature.com/commsenv


Measuring the mere presence of skeptical voices is only
partially helpful. The ways they are contextualized are central to a
fuller interpretation, and in particular, the degree to which their
views are representative of mainstream science about climate
change24. We found that in our sample from right-wing channels,
only one included some brief context: the Fox News report
described one of its guests as “having a minority view,” although
he was given by far the most airtime.
The presence of skepticism relative to other frames. Figure 4
shows the presence of evidence and response skepticism com-
pared to eight other discourses promulgated by the IPCC and
other UN agencies (see Table 2). As can be seen, evidence and
response skepticism were the two most common discourses found
on right-wing channels, followed by the stark warning (“code
red”) from the UN highlighting the need for urgent action, and
the IPCC’s extreme weather statement that “human inﬂuence is
making extreme climate events, including heat waves, heavy
rainfall, and droughts, more frequent and severe.” In sharp
contrast, for the mainstream channels, the two types of skepticism
were among the least present, even as response skepticism was
present in 10 of the 19 programs (53%), albeit usually in the sense
of “directed skepticism.” The two most common discourses were
“stark warning” (18 out of 19 programs—95%) and the IPCC
discourse that climate change is happening now in many parts of
the world and/or is irreversible (100%). The mainstream channels
followed the main discourses of the IPCC report much more
closely than the right-wing channels. The certainty discourse (i.e.,
phrases such as “It is indisputable that human activities are
causing climate change” or “the IPCC is virtually certain about
the key ﬁndings”) was much more present in these channels, as
were the reasons for hope and the opportunity discourses.
Discussion
These results suggest that evidence skepticism has virtually dis-
appeared from mainstream channels, but there are still strong
elements of it in our sample of right-wing channels in four of the
ﬁve countries. Much of this consisted of impact skepticism, rather
than a trend or attribution skepticism. In other words, evidence
skepticism on right-wing channels tended not so much to dispute
the reality of climate change, but to suggest that “the climate
movement”—including scientists, environmentalists, politicians,
and the mainstream media—were propagating an alarmist dis-
course. For example, SwebbTV in Sweden often focused their
criticism on the mainstream media’s “scare propaganda,” rather
than
the
science
itself—a
form
of
“process
skepticism”
mentioned above.
On mainstream channels, the presence of climate change
skepticism or skeptics and general contestation around the
IPCC’s WGI report was much less present in our sample than in
the coverage of previous IPCC reports26,29. For example, previous
research26 found that the coverage of the IPCC’s WGI AR5 report
on UK and US television was “contested and politicised” (p. 380),
and that in the UK coverage, the Unsettled Science frame (i.e.,
questioning climate science or solutions prompted by the science)
was “common” (p. 381). Our study suggests a noticeable shift
away from the presence of evidence skepticism on mainstream
channels’ coverage of the AR5 compared to the coverage of the
AR6, at least in the Anglosphere countries of the UK, USA, and
Australia. Moreover, other research29 found a strong presence of
skeptics on air in the UK and Australian coverage of the WGI
report, but in our study, there were no evidence skeptics present
in the UK mainstream coverage; and in the Australian coverage, it
was a policy skeptic rather than an evidence skeptic. The absence
of evidence skeptics and skepticism in the ABC and BBC coverage
is due mainly to a change in company policy whereby the pre-
sence of evidence skeptics is largely to be avoided or reduced
(see Supplementary Notes). In the USA, there is a sharp dis-
tinction between Fox and other channels, which is both a
reﬂection and cause of increasing polarization in both news
treatments and consumption of climate change news59–61.
In Sweden, a country not previously known for climate skep-
ticism, there is evidence of forms of science and response skep-
ticism across our sample and beyond it (for example, on the
commercial channels TV4’s Nyhetsmorgon on August 13).
However, the skepticism of the IPCC report that was expressed
on SVT was voiced by climate scientists saying that the latest
science proved a worse situation than in the report, while the
skepticism on SwebbTV was downplaying the seriousness of
climate change. This is in line with research showing that climate
change has become an increasingly polarizing issue in Sweden62.
In Brazil, another country not known in the past for different
forms of climate skepticism, our sample suggests that most forms
of skepticism, except for directed response skepticism, continue to
be absent from television climate coverage there, at least as evi-
denced by the coverage of the IPCC report. However, as stated
earlier, this may be explained by the scant coverage of the report,
whereas a wider sample of climate coverage may well have shown
the presence of some skeptics on Brazilian television.
As we have seen in our study, when evidence skepticism was
present in mainstream media, it was usually in a mild form
measured either by volume, strength of argumentation, or speciﬁc
framing. However, more importantly, forms of response skepti-
cism are present in a wider range of countries and media outlets
than previous research has shown for evidence skepticism.
Response skepticism is present in some of the coverage by
mainstream channels, and not only the right-wing ones. Versions
of it were found in coverage in the UK by the BBC, ITV, and
Channel 4; in Sweden on SVT; in Australia on Channel 7 and 9;
in Brazil on O Globo and SBT; and in the USA on MSNBC. In
one case (SVT), criticism was directed at government policies in
general for not being forceful enough. But in most cases, the
examples of response skepticism were “directed,” where country-
speciﬁc economic, social and political obstacles to enacting
national climate policies were raised, rather than where climate
action in general was dismissed or questioned. In contrast, there
was
more
non-speciﬁc
response
skepticism
on
right-wing
Fig. 3 Presence of skeptics on air in mainstream and right-wing channels.
Mainstream channels in blue and right-wing channels in red. *Response
skeptics here include only those expressing general response skepticism,
and not directed response skepticism.
COMMUNICATIONS EARTH & ENVIRONMENT | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00760-2
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS EARTH & ENVIRONMENT |  (2023) 4:118 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00760-2 | www.nature.com/commsenv
7


channels such as a presenter on GBTV arguing that “whatever we
do here [in the UK], it is China that needs to do far more than
us,” or a contributor on Fox News suggesting that ‘only being able
to ﬂy when it is morally justiﬁable’ would lead to people having to
entirely change their lifestyles.
The ﬁnding that many right-wing channels included evidence
skepticism conﬁrms a continuation of the trend whereby different
forms of skepticism have been much more prevalent in right-
wing than left-wing news outlets. Our (limited) sample suggests
that they now combine evidence and response skepticism in
roughly equal amounts (see Fig. 1). For example, Fox News
continued its historical record of skepticism38,47,63 by criticizing
the report and hosting evidence skeptics, but they also included a
wide range of examples of response skepticism (such as the
infringement on civil liberties by taking climate action). On Sky
News in Australia, there were examples of climate science impact
skepticism and a range of examples of response skepticism. And
on GBTV, one host expressed the view that the IPCC was over-
alarmist and stressed the impracticality of taking action. Given
the relatively narrow size of our sample and the absence of
detailed, comparative data from the past breaking down the types
of skepticism, it is hard to reach a deﬁnitive answer as to whether
right-wing television channels in general have shifted to include
more response skepticism in their coverage, but our results are in
line with the ﬁndings from other research5,45. Nor is it possible to
ascertain the extent to which our ﬁndings were driven by the
nature of the IPCC report (based mainly on climate science or
evidence but with some policy implications—see Table 2).
However, research on the coverage of the Green New Deal (GND,
i.e., a policy initiative) on Fox and CNN suggests that in both US
media, skepticism of the GND was higher than skepticism of the
science of climate change (although the latter was still present),
and criticism of the GND was much more common on the right-
wing channel, Fox59. This ﬁnding and our results would suggest
that the balance between evidence and response skepticism is
related to the type of climate topic the media are covering.
It is of note that right-wing media in four countries (Australia,
Sweden, UK and USA) are combining evidence and response
skepticism,
while
mainstream
channels
in
three
countries
(Australia, UK and USA) are moving away from evidence skep-
ticism. This is occurring despite national differences in media and
political contexts.
By focusing on the nature of response skepticism across a
broad range of television channels, we are also able to show the
multiple ways it appears on a popular, but little studied, media
platform. Although the high cost of taking action and “whata-
boutism” were the most common, a wide variety of arguments
was present. These different discourses are not dissimilar to those
found in the classiﬁcations or taxonomies of response skepticism
or obstructionism found in public statements by organized con-
trarian groups9,64, although an element of caution should be
expressed as our coding of the different discourses was in part
drawn deductively from this literature. It is also worth high-
lighting that Fox News unexpectedly displayed a relative absence
of coverage. This ﬁnding is supported by other research63, which
suggests that other right-wing media outlets in the USA were
unusually quiet on the report. Qualitative (interview) work would
be needed to corroborate whether this “denialism by silence” was
an intentional editorial policy. Likewise, in Brazil, the reduced
coverage might be explained not by a deliberate policy of
downplaying the IPCC report but by the pressing newsworthiness
of another story, in this case, the Brazilian Parliamentary Com-
mission of Inquiry into alleged corruption surrounding COVID
policies taking place in the same week as the report. All the
primetime programs we analyzed spent much of their airtime
covering the story about the corruption accusations against the
former President Bolsonaro and his allies.
It is important not to overstate the signiﬁcance of our ﬁndings
for their potential or real impact on the general public. The
audience for some of the right-wing channels we monitored is not
substantial, or considerably lower than mainstream channels
(see Supplementary Notes). GBTV attracts around 100,000
viewers for the Nigel Farage show, SwebbTV between 10,000 and
20,000 viewers on its own platform. In contrast, the three
mainstream channels in the UK have audiences of between one
and four million for their nightly news programs and the main-
stream channels in Sweden have between 500,000 and one mil-
lion. Fox News is the most-watched cable news network in the
Fig. 4 Relative presence of discourses in mainstream and right-wing channels. Mainstream channels in blue and right-wing channels in red.
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS EARTH & ENVIRONMENT | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00760-2
8
COMMUNICATIONS EARTH & ENVIRONMENT |  (2023) 4:118 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00760-2 | www.nature.com/commsenv


US, and delivered an average primetime audience of 2.5 million
viewers in November 2020, consisting mostly of audience seg-
ments already sympathetic to its editorial line (see Supplementary
Notes). These ﬁgures, while still large, are considerably smaller
than the average audience for network television during the
evening news timeslot: 7.6 million for ABC and 6.5 million for
NBC in 2020. Likewise, the cable TV station Sky News has a small
share of the Australian audience compared to the main com-
mercial and public service stations.
More broadly, our results need to be contextualized within a
general shift in the media coverage of climate change from
debating climate science to discussing climate policies. Recent
research has identiﬁed a move away in the media across several
countries from the science toward a debate about appropriate
policies and societal implications45, more emphasis on sustain-
able futures and empowering solutions rather than apocalyptic
visions65, and in UK editorials from skepticism about climate
science to questioning the cost of action66. This shifting media
context calls for more nuance in future media analysis, which
incorporates (i) more deﬁnitional clarity of the terms surrounding
obstructionism
and
their
operationalization
for
content
analysis67, (ii) more detailed methods to assess “legitimate” policy
discussion as opposed to false claims from organized skeptical
groups promoting response skepticism, (iii) attention to how the
latter may be framed differently to previous types of skepticism,
and (iv) attention to how any shift in skeptic argumentation is
dependent on a range of contextual peculiarities including
changing media landscapes and editorial priorities, the presence
of organized skepticism, and wider political changes34. Much
work has focused on the USA, but less is known about other
countries.
If the trend toward more response skepticism being present
across all types of media outlets continues, it represents an
important new challenge to climate action, and requires new
research in order to chart its presence and formulate effective,
evidence-based responses. As others have argued9, a level of spe-
ciﬁcity is needed to be able to counter the range of policy-skeptic
arguments. A complementary analysis with a wider sample of
media outlets over a longer period including a variety of popular
and fringe media outlets, and social media platforms, is also
necessary and urgent. Television news programs, while important
for reaching large publics, are restricted in their range of options for
climate stories by the ephemeral and event-based nature of the
editorial drivers, and by the time constraints on their reports
compared to online news coverage, and responses on Twitter,
Facebook and others, which often enjoy a longer duration of
attention.
In all ﬁve countries we selected, the political context alone over
the next few years will entail growing media coverage of climate
solutions, especially Net Zero policies68. In the UK, in early 2022,
the Net Zero Scrutiny Group, a small group of right-wing politi-
cians, emerged with an active presence in the right-wing media,
putting forward the argument that they do not deny the science or
the need to decarbonize, but question the economic and social costs
falling unevenly on lower-income groups. In the US, the Heartland
Institute has focused its attacks on President Biden’s climate policies
as causing higher fuel and food prices and fewer jobs. Australian
conservative politicians regularly raise the issue of jobs and costs for
individuals to sway the public against taking action.
Within this context, more research is needed to identify the
presence and taxonomies in the media of counter-arguments such
as the (lower) costs of action versus the high costs of inaction, the
health co-beneﬁts, the transformative potential for tackling
inequity, improved energy security, green job creation, more
efﬁcient and cleaner transport, and new technologies—and how
strongly these rebuttals to response skepticism are voiced, and by
whom. Complementary audience and focus group work are also
needed to assess how such arguments and counter-arguments are
received by different audiences with different values in different
countries and media contexts. “Prebunking” may also help pre-
pare audiences to critically assess misleading claims when
exposed to them69. Understanding, monitoring, and responding
to changing forms of climate skepticism remain a pressing
priority for research and action.
Methods
We took account of the various methods and concepts scholars have used to
measure the political identity of media outlets (e.g., story treatments, editorials and
opinion pieces, ownership, support for governments or political parties/individuals,
support for policy options, viewership/readership proﬁles, newsroom ideologies),
particularly across different countries38,54,55,70–72. Labeling is not straightforward: a
channel can be seen as “center-left” or “left-wing” because the general media
landscape is biased toward the right; or a media outlet, such as Globo TV in Brazil,
can be left-wing or progressive on social issues or the environment, but con-
servative on economic issues or opposition to left-wing political parties. We
recognize our labels are approximations. For Australia, the three channels we
classiﬁed as mainstream were ABC1 Sydney, Channel 7 Sydney, and Channel 9
Sydney; for Brazil, Globo, Record, and SBT; for Sweden, SVT1, SVT2 and TV4; for
the UK, BBC1, ITV and Channel 4; and for the USA, ABC, NBC and MSNBC (see
Table 1). In most cases, their reach and trust levels were very high compared to
other media brands. These are described in detail in the Supplementary Notes, as is
their general climate coverage.
Next, one “right-wing” channel was chosen for each country applying the criteria
of one or some of the following: the presence on air of regular right-wing com-
mentators, ownership by a known right-wing ﬁgure or organization, evidence for
consistent support for a particular right-wing party, policy or president, or a right-
wing composition to the channel’s audience. The reasons for our choice of the ﬁve
channels as “right-wing” can be found in the Supplementary Notes. The nature of
these right-wing channels, and their platforms, vary from country to country due to
the differing media environments and variety of platforms, and so span a range
where they could be placed along the spectrum of right-wing leanings. The case of
Brazil was complex, due to there being three major channels that offer strong
support for the former right-wing President, Jair Bolsonaro (namely, SBT, Rede
TV! and Record). However, we chose Rede TV! as our example of a right-wing
station due to the presence of a right-wing climate science skeptic who hosts a
regular opinion program.
We collected programs in all ﬁve countries on the day before the release of the
IPCC report (August 8, 2021), the day of the release (August 9), and the day after
(August 10). Several channels did not have any coverage on August 8 or 10. There
were some examples of very brief mentions of the report on August 8, but we
excluded these for being less than a minute. As far as we are aware, few programs
included much coverage of the IPCC report outside of these three dates. The
exception was three programs in Sweden on August 11, 13 and 23.
The full USA sample size for the three dates was 27 programs across the four
channels, equivalent to more than 20 h of programming. However, of these 27
programs, only 7 included coverage of the report (MSNBC: 3 out of 7 shows; NBC
and ABC, one of three shows each; Fox News 2 out of 14 shows), which were the
seven we analyzed. In the UK, we examined 9 evening news programs on BBC,
ITV, and C4, of which only 3 included coverage. In Brazil, we looked initially at 21
programs on 7 channels, but these were reduced to 12 programs on 4 channels of
which 4 had coverage; and in Sweden, 9 programs of which 4 were analyzed. So, for
these four countries, we looked at 66 programs on the main linear or cable
channels (a rough estimate would be 50 h of program content), before selecting
those which were substantively about the IPCC (at least a minute of coverage). The
method was slightly different for Australia due to the city-based nature of the
media, and the data collection tool chosen (Meltwater). Here, we chose three
Sydney-based channels (as having the largest population) where there was coverage
of the report on the same three days, but we did not include all mention of the
reports on those channels, just those which mentioned the IPCC during the pro-
grams near or during the peak evening viewing. Sky news was monitored sepa-
rately, and only those programs which mentioned the report were included. For
GBTV, we used relevant keywords via YouTube search to uncover relevant clips
from that time period as GBTV programs are not archived or accessible in the
database we used for the mainstream channels. For SwebbTV, we looked at the
programs that were explicitly about climate change on its website, as well as
viewing all regular news shows including those that covered climate.
Some were news-based programs, while others combined news and opinion. In
most cases, we chose programs broadcast at popular viewing times such as evening
news shows that command large audiences. For example, BBC News at Ten reg-
ularly has audiences of around 4 million, and is the second most-watched news
bulletin on UK television after BBC News at Six; Jornal Nacional has the largest
nightly audience of any station in Brazil at around 17 million in 2021, while
Channel 7, Channel 9 and ABC News together command nearly 80% of the free-to-
air television market in Australia.
COMMUNICATIONS EARTH & ENVIRONMENT | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00760-2
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS EARTH & ENVIRONMENT |  (2023) 4:118 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00760-2 | www.nature.com/commsenv
9


We based our analysis on watching the broadcasts of the relevant programs, sup-
ported by transcripts if available. The codebook was divided into two introductory
sections (A and B), then the three main areas of assessment mentioned above: the forms
of contestation, the presence on air of skeptics (by type and sector), and the relative
presence of contestation compared to other prominent discourses. It contained 44
binary variables (other than the formal variables giving details of each of the programs
monitored). In part C, the areas of contestation and discourses of delay were based
deductively on the typologies of climate delay discourses found in the literature dis-
cussed in the “Introduction” section, and particularly in Figure 1 found in refs. 9 and 19,
and then inductively on an initial assessment of the presence of different arguments
found in our sample. These are found in Table 3.
In part D, in addition to the presence of skeptics, we assessed whether the mention
of skeptical thinking or their inclusion was sufﬁciently contextualized, for example, by
saying that these views were not representative of the global scientiﬁc consensus.
In part E, following the method used by previous studies7, the other discourses
were based deductively on the key IPCC ofﬁcial “messages,” and then amended
inductively based on a preliminary assessment of some of the programs. The term
“messages” is not used as a value-laden term implying normative action, but in the
sense of essential information for a journalist, policy maker or wider audience. The
sources for these messages were (a) the ofﬁcial IPCC press release73, (b) the main
messages highlighted in the prepared statement by the IPCC chair Hoe-Sung Lee at
the press conference on August 9, and (c) the headline statements from the SPM42.
In some cases, these messages are approximations rather than verbatim repro-
ductions. The ten discourses assessed are found in Table 2.
Discourses 2, 3, 4, 5, and 7 were based closely on the IPCC ofﬁcial key messa-
ging. Discourse 1 was based on the message from UN secretary-general, Antonio
Guterres74. Discourse 6 about uncertainty was not highlighted in the key messa-
ging, but was present in much of the SPM. It was included as this has been picked
out by skeptical responses to IPCC reports in the past. Although WGI reports do
not include discussions about policy opportunities (discourse 8), we wanted to
assess the presence of such discourses given the debate in the communication
literature about the advantages of including more hopeful messaging75. Examples
of the phrases evidencing these discourses during the television coverage can be
found in the codebook in the Supplementary Methods.
Eight coders (three for USA, two for the UK, and one each for the other three
countries) were used to test the coding of the programs. Two rounds of pilot coding
tests by all eight coders took place in order to reconcile any misunderstandings or
disagreements between the coders. The codebook was amended at each stage to
improve clarity and achieve more coder consistency. One program was then coded by
the eight coders to check acceptable results for coder reliability. The website http://
dfreelon.org/utils/recalfront/recal3/ was used. According to both Fleiss’ Kappa and
Krippendorff’s Alpha, the overall score for the reliability test was 0.878 overall (and
95% for Kappa’s pairwise), which is regarded as well over the acceptable levels for
coder reliability. However, there were two variables (of the 44 where there was a binary
option) that showed substantial disagreement. The ﬁrst was variable 13 on the presence
of general response skepticism and variable 13d on personal sacriﬁce (see Codebook
in Supplementary Methods), which both scored <0.5 according to Fleiss’ Kappa. In
both cases, the text of the codebook was discussed, clariﬁed and re-written to ensure
more consistency in the coding on these two variables.
Despite these high scores for coder reliability, different country interpretations of
some of the variables may have affected our results. Other limitations were that we
assessed only the presence of the various discourses, and not their dominance or
salience30. Also, an assessment of the images shown during the coverage of the
IPCC report would have given a complete picture of how the dominant discourses
were presented, but budgets and the limits on the length of articles submitted to
journals did not allow for their inclusion. Computational methods assessing a
greater number of program scripts in more countries could have given a wider
sample on which to base our ﬁndings. However, such methods would not match
the level of detail captured by the manual coding.
Data availability
The data sets providing the basis for Figs. 1–4 (i.e., number of articles for each category
along x-axis) can be found at https://ﬁgshare.com/articles/dataset/Global_mainstream_
television_coverage_of_IPCC_2021_report/21552780.
Received: 19 May 2022; Accepted: 13 December 2022;
References
1.
McCright, A. M. & Dunlap, R. E. Defeating Kyoto: the conservative movement’s
impact on US climate change policy. Soc. Probl. 50, 348–373 (2003).
2.
Oreskes, N. & Conway, E. M. Merchants of Doubt: How a Handful of Scientists
Obscured the Truth on Issues from Tobacco Smoke to Global Warming
(Bloomsbury Publishing, 2011).
3.
Poortinga, W., Spence, A., Whitmarsh, L., Capstick, S. & Pidgeon, N. F.
Uncertain climate: an investigation into public scepticism about
anthropogenic climate change. Glob. Environ. Change 21, 1015–1024 (2011).
4.
Rahmstorf, S. The Climate Sceptics (Munich Re, 2005).
5.
Schmid-Petri, H., Adam, S., Schmucki, I. & Häussler, T. A changing climate of
skepticism: the factors shaping climate change coverage in the US press. Public
Underst. Sci. 26, 498–513 (2015).
6.
Van Rensburg, W. Climate change scepticism: a conceptual re-evaluation.
SAGE Open, 5; https://doi.org/10.1177/2158244015579723 (2015).
7.
Sanford, M. et al. Controversy around climate change reports: a case study of
Twitter responses to the 2019 IPCC report on land. Clim. Change 167, 59
(2021).
8.
Howarth, C. C. & Sharman, A. G. Labeling opinions in the climate debate: a
critical review. WIREs Clim. Change 6, 239–254 (2015).
9.
Coan, T. G., Boussalis, C., Cook, J. & Nanko, M. O. Computer-assisted
classiﬁcation of contrarian claims about climate change. Sci. Rep. 11, 1–12 (2021).
10. O’Neill, S. J. & Boykoff, M. T. Climate denier, skeptic, or contrarian? Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 151152–E151151 (2010).
11. Boykoff, M., & Farrell, J. Climate change countermovement organizations and
media attention in the United States. In Climate Change Denial and Public
Relations: Strategic Communication and Interest Groups in Climate Inaction
(eds Almiron, N. & Xifra, J.) 121–139 (Routledge, 2019).
12. Busch, T. & Judick, L. Climate change—that is not real! A comparative
analysis of climate-sceptic think tanks in the USA and Germany. Clim. Change
164, 18 (2021).
13. Dunlap, R., & McCright, A. Organized climate change denial. In The Oxford
Handbook of Climate Change and Society (eds Dryzek, J.S., Norgaard, R.B. &
Schlossberg, D.) 144–160 (Oxford University Press, 2011).
14. Boussalis, C. & Coan, T. G. Text-mining the signals of climate change doubt.
Glob. Environ. Change 36, 89–100 (2016).
15. Brulle, R. J. Institutionalizing delay: Foundation funding and the creation of us
climate change counter-movement organizations. Clim. Change 122, 681–694
(2014).
16. Farrell, J. Corporate funding and ideological polarization about climate change.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113, 92–97 (2016).
17. Brulle, R. J. Advocating inaction: a historical analysis of the Global Climate
Coalition. Env. Polit. https://doi.org/10.1080/09644016.2022.2058815 (2022).
18. Bonds, E. Beyond denialism: think tank approaches to climate change. Sociol.
Compass 10, 306–317 (2016).
19. Lamb, W. et al. Discourses of climate delay. Glob. Sustain. 3, e17 (2020).
20. Sapinski, J. P. Climate capitalism and the global corporate elite network.
Environ. Sociol. 1, 268–279 (2015).
21. Wetts, R. Models and morals: elite-oriented and value-neutral discourse
dominates American organizations’ framings of climate change. Soc. Forces
98, 1339–1369 (2020).
22. Brulle, R. J., Hall, G., Loy, L. & Schell-Smith, K. Obstructing action:
foundation funding and US climate change counter-movement organizations.
Clim. Change 166, 17 (2021).
23. McAllister, L. et al. Balance as bias, resolute on the retreat? Updates & analyses
of newspaper coverage in the United States, United Kingdom, New Zealand,
Australia and Canada over the past 15 years. Environ. Res. Lett. 16, 094008
(2021).
24. Brüggemann, M. & Engesser, S. Beyond false balance: how interpretive
journalism shapes media coverage of climate change. Glob. Environ. Change
42, 58–67 (2017).
25. O’Neill, S. & Pidcock, R. Climate change communication and the IPCC. Clim.
Change 169, 19 (2021).
26. O’Neill, S., Williams, H. T. P., Kurz, T., Wiersma, B. & Boykoff, M. Dominant
frames in legacy and social media coverage of the IPCC Fifth Assessment
Report. Nat. Clim. Change 5, 380–385 (2015).
27. Bjurström, A. & Polk, M. Physical and economic bias in climate change
research: a scientometric study of IPCC Third Assessment Report. Clim.
Change 108, 1–22 (2011).
28. Schäfer, M. S. & Painter, J. Climate journalism in a changing media ecosystem:
assessing the production of climate change-related news around the world.
WIREs Clim. Change 12, e675 (2021).
29. Painter J. Disaster Averted? Television Coverage of the 2013/14 IPCC’s Climate
Change Reports https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/our-research/disaster-
averted-television-coverage-201314-ipccs-climate-change-reports (Reuters
Institute for the Study of Journalism, 2014).
30. Painter, J. Climate Change in the Media: Reporting Risk and Uncertainty
(Tauris, 2013).
31. Antilla, L. Climate of scepticism: US newspaper coverage of the science of
climate change. Glob. Environ. Change 15, 338–352 (2005).
32. Boykoff, M. T. & Boykoff, J. M. Balance as bias: global warming and the US
prestige press. Glob. Environ. Change 14, 125–136 (2004).
33. Oreskes, N. The scientiﬁc consensus on climate change. Science 306,
1686–1686 (2004).
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS EARTH & ENVIRONMENT | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00760-2
10
COMMUNICATIONS EARTH & ENVIRONMENT |  (2023) 4:118 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00760-2 | www.nature.com/commsenv


34. Painter, J. Journalistic depictions of uncertainty about climate change. In
Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Climate Science (eds Nisbet, M. C., Ho, S. S.,
Markowitz, E., O’Neill, S., Schäfer, M. S. & Thaker, J.) (Oxford University
Press, 2016).
35. Painter, J. & Ashe, T. Cross-national comparison of the presence of climate
scepticism in the print media in six countries, 2007–10. Environ. Res. Lett. 7,
044005 (2012).
36. Carvalho, A. Ideological cultures and media discourses on scientiﬁc
knowledge: re-reading news on climate change. Public Underst. Sci. 16,
223–243 (2007).
37. Elsasser, S. W. & Dunlap, R. E. Leading voices in the denier choir: conservative
columnists’ dismissal of global warming and denigration of climate science.
Am. Behav. Sci. 57, 754–776 (2013).
38. Feldman, L., Maibach, E. W., Roser-Renouf, C. & Leiserowitz, A. Climate on
cable: the nature and impact of global warming coverage on Fox News, CNN,
and MSNBC. Int. J. Press Polit. 17, 3–31 (2012).
39. Petersen, A. M., Vincent, E. M. & Westerling, A. L. Discrepancy in scientiﬁc
authority and media visibility of climate change scientists and contrarians.
Nat. Commun. 10, 1–14 (2019).
40. Wetts, R. In climate news, statements from large businesses and opponents of
climate action receive heightened visibility. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 117,
19054–19060 (2020).
41. IPCC. Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of
Working Group I to the sixth assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (Cambridge University Press, 2021).
42. IPCC. Summary for Policymakers in Climate Change 2021: The Physical
Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 1–39 (Cambridge
University Press, 2022).
43. Comfort, S. E. & Park, Y. E. On the ﬁeld of environmental communication: a
systematic review of the peer-reviewed literature. Environ. Comm. 12, 862–875
(2018).
44. Newman, N., Fletcher, R., Schulz, A., Andi, S. & Nielsen, R. K. Reuters
Institute Digital News Report 2020. https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/
sites/default/ﬁles/2020-06/DNR_2020_FINAL.pdf (Reuters Institute for the
Study of Journalism, 2020).
45. Painter, J. & Schäfer, M. S. Global similarities and persistent differences: a
survey of comparative studies on climate change communication. In Climate
Change and the Media (eds Brevini, B. & Lewis, J.) 39–58 (Peter Lang, 2018).
46. Holmes, D., & Star, C. Climate change communication in Australia: the
politics, mainstream media and fossil fuel industry nexus. In Handbook of
Climate Change Communication: Vol. 1. Climate Change Management (eds
Leal Filho, W., Manolas, E., Azul, A., Azeiteiro, U. & McGhie, H.) 151–170
(Springer, 2018).
47. Painter, J. Poles Apart: The International Reporting on Climate Scepticism
(Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism, 2011).
48. Ferrante, L. & Fearnside, P. M. Brazil’s new president and ‘ruralists’ threaten
Amazonia’s environment, traditional peoples and the global climate. Environ.
Conserv. J. 46, 261–263 (2019).
49. Miguel, J. C. H. A. “meada” do negacionismo climático e o impedimento da
governamentalização ambiental no Brasil. Sociedade E Estado 37, 293–315 (2022).
50. Rydgren, J. & van der Meiden, S. The radical right and the end of Swedish
exceptionalism. Eur. Political Sci. 18, 439–455 (2019).
51. Hultman, M., Björk, A., & Viinikka, T. Far-right and climate change denial.
Denouncing environmental challenges via anti-establishment rhetoric,
marketing of doubts, industrial/breadwinner masculinities, enactments and
ethno-nationalism. In The Far Right and the Environment (ed. Forchtner, B.)
122–136 (Routledge, 2019).
52. Holt, K. Alternative media and the notion of anti-systemness: towards an
analytical framework. Media Commun. 6, 49 (2018).
53. Vowles, K. & Hultman, M. Scare-quoting climate: the rapid rise of climate denial
in the Swedish far-right media ecosystem. Nord. J. Media Stud. 3, 79–95 (2021).
54. Fletcher, R., Cornia, A. & Nielsen, R. K. How polarized are online and ofﬂine
news audiences? A comparative analysis of twelve countries. Int. J. Press Polit.
25, 169–195 (2020).
55. Feldman, L., Hart, P. S. & Milosevic, T. Cimate change. Public Underst. Sci. 26,
481–497 (2017).
56. Bedford, D. & Cook, J. Climate Change: Examining the Facts (ABC-CLIO, 2016).
57. Australian Government. Australia’s Long-term Emissions Reduction Plan: A
Whole-of-Economy Plan to Achieve Net Zero Emissions by 2050 (Department
of Industry, Science, Energy and Resources, 2021).
58. Crowley, K. Fighting the future: the politics of climate policy failure in
Australia (2015–2020). WIREs Clim. Change. 12, e725 (2021).
59. Bhatti, S., Jones, B., Uppalapati, S. S. & Kristiansen, S. Major media outlets and
climate change action: comparing US media coverage of the green new deal.
Environ. Commun. https://doi.org/10.1080/17524032.2021.1995457 (2021).
60. Chinn, S., Sol Hart, P. & Soroka, S. Politicization and polarization in climate
change news content, 1985-2017. Sci. Commun. 42, 112–129 (2020).
61. Tandoc, E. C. Jr, Takahashi, B. & Thomas, R. J. Bias vs bias. Journal. Pract. 12,
834–849 (2018).
62. Rönnerstrand, B. Därför är personer till höger mindre oroade för klimatet. In
Du sköra nya värld (eds Andersson, U., Oscarsson, H., Rönnerstrand, B., &
Theorin, N.) 263–273 (Göteborgs universitet: SOM-institutet, 2022).
63. MacDonald, T. Right-wing media have been uncharacteristically quiet on the
IPCC report. Media Matters https://www.mediamatters.org/fox-news/right-
wing-media-have-been-uncharacteristically-quiet-ipcc-report (2021).
64. McKie, R. E. Climate change counter movement neutralization techniques: a
typology to examine the climate change counter movement. Sociol. Inq. 89,
288–316 (2019).
65. Guenther, L., Brüggemann, M. & Elkobros, S. From global doom to
sustainable solutions: international news magazines’ multimodal framing of
our future with climate change. Journal. Stud. 23, 131–148 (2022).
66. Gabbatiss, J., Hayes, S., Goodman, J. & Prater T. Analysis: how UK
newspapers changed their minds about climate change. Carbon Brief. https://
interactive.carbonbrief.org/how-uk-newspapers-changed-minds-climate-
change (2022)
67. Almiron, N. & Moreno, J. A. Beyond climate change denialism: conceptual
challenges in communicating climate action obstruction. Ámbitos Rev. Intl.
Comun. 55, 9–23 (2022).
68. Fankhauser, S. et al. The meaning of net zero and how to get it right. Nat.
Clim. Change 12, 15–21 (2022).
69. Lewandowsky, S. & van der Linden, S. Countering misinformation and fake news
through inoculation and prebunking. Eur. Rev. Soc. Psychol. 32, 348–384 (2021).
70. Hassell, H. J. G., Miles, M. R., & Reuning, K. Does the ideology of the
newsroom affect the provision of media slant? Polit. Commun. https://doi.org/
10.1080/10584609.2021.1986613 (2021).
71. Gentzkow, M. & Shapiro, J. M. What drives media slant? Evidence from U.S.
daily newspapers. Econometrica 78, 35–71 (2010).
72. Rydgren, J. The radical right: an introduction. In The Oxford Handbook of the
Radical Right (ed. Rydgren, J.) 1–16; https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/
9780190274559.013.1 (Oxford University Press, 2018).
73. IPCC. Climate Change Widespread, Rapid, and Intensifying – IPCC (Press
release) https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2021/08/IPCC_WGI-AR6-
Press-Release_en.pdf (2021).
74. UN. Secretary-General’s statement on the IPCC Working Group 1 Report on
the Physical Science Basis of the Sixth Assessment. 9 August; https://www.un.
org/sg/en/content/secretary-generals-statement-the-ipcc-working-group-1-
report-the-physical-science-basis-of-the-sixth-assessment (2021).
75. Ettinger, J. et al. Climate of hope or doom and gloom? Testing the climate
change hope vs. fear communications debate through online videos. Clim.
Change 164, 19 (2021).
Acknowledgements
This research was funded by the Institute at Brown for Environment and Society, Brown
University.
Author contributions
J. Painter: conceptualization; project administration; resources; data collection; visualiza-
tion; writing—original draft. J.E.: conceptualization, visualization, coding, writing—original
draft. D.H.: conceptualization; data collection. L.L.: conceptualization; data collection and
coding, writing—original draft. J. Pinto: conceptualization, data collection and coding,
writing—original draft. L.R.: conceptualization, data collection and coding, writing—ori-
ginal draft. L.T.-W.: conceptualization. K.V.: conceptualization, data collection and coding,
writing—original draft. R.W.: conceptualization; project administration; data collection and
coding; writing—original draft. All authors were involved in writing—review and editing.
Competing interests
J. Painter has worked for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) as an
external consultant. All other authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00760-2.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to James Painter.
Peer review information Communications Earth & Environment thanks Hannah
Schmid-Petri and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer
review of this work. Primary Handling Editor: Joe Aslin.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
COMMUNICATIONS EARTH & ENVIRONMENT | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00760-2
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS EARTH & ENVIRONMENT |  (2023) 4:118 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00760-2 | www.nature.com/commsenv
11


Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2023
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS EARTH & ENVIRONMENT | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00760-2
12
COMMUNICATIONS EARTH & ENVIRONMENT |  (2023) 4:118 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00760-2 | www.nature.com/commsenv
