communications earth & environment
Article
A Nature Portfolio journal
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-025-02124-4
Event triggers and opinion leaders shape
climate change discourse on Weibo
Check for updates
Jianxun Yang
1,2,3, Yaxin Hu1,2, Miaomiao Liu
1
, Yuan Li1
, Zongwei Ma
1, Wen Fang
1 &
Jun Bi
1,2,3
Understanding how real-world events and opinion leaders shape climate change discussions is vital
for improving communication and policy formulation to meet global carbon mitigation goals. This
study analyzed 5.3 million original posts from Weibo (2012–2022), China’s largest social media
platform, to examine climate change discourse. We found ﬁve event types triggering 48 discussion
peaks, including online activities, international conferences, extreme weather, domestic policies, and
international news. Posts generally conveyed positive attitudes, though sentiment decreased during
haze pollution and the COVID-19 pandemic. Network analysis revealed seven opinion leader groups
with distinct strategies: ofﬁcial media and institutions emphasized political will, global initiatives, and
socio-economic implications, while universities and grassroots individuals focused on scientiﬁc reality
and personal actions. Celebrities and unofﬁcial accounts often highlighted geopolitical topics,
especially China-US relations. We suggest reducing fragmented echo chambers and fostering
personal connections through digital media platforms to enhance public awareness.
Climatechangeisoneofthemostpressingchallengesconfrontinghumanity
today. Despite climate actions being primarily led by governments, public
opinions play an increasingly signiﬁcant role in shaping the formulation,
implementation, and effectiveness of policies1. Climate change has trans-
cended the realm of scientiﬁc debate and evolved into a multifaceted issue
that inﬂuences not only environmental policies but also social2, political3,
and livelihood discussions4. For example, climate change has emerged as a
good reﬂection of political polarization and population segregation, with
divergent views aligning along ideology and partisanship5. In this context,
comprehending public discourse of climate change is instrumental in
designing more targetedclimate policies6. It also sheds light on the inﬂuence
of social culture and media messaging on public viewpoints7,8.
As the world’s largest emitter, China is playing a crucial role in global
mitigationandadaptationeffort.Yet,researchonpublicdiscourseofclimate
change in China remains limited, often relying on surveys that assess
awarenessorpolicysupport9–11.Whilevaluable,thesestudiesfrequentlylack
thetimelinessanddepthneededtocapturehowthepublicinterpretsclimate
issues and engages in discussions spurred by speciﬁc real-world events12.
With the rapid growth of digital industries, a wide range of social media
platforms has emerged, offering opportunities to publicize environmental
concerns, foster knowledge-sharing, and support governance13–15. Over the
lastdecades,China’sclimatecommunicationmodelshavealsoevolved,with
increasing engagement on online platforms16. However, the key opinion
leaders, their networks, and framing strategies are largely uncharted, leaving
a gap in understanding how public discourse is shaped as a result9. To
developeffectiveandtailoredstrategiesforfutureclimatecommunication,it
is essential to reveal underlying mechanisms that drive discourse spread.
Social media provides valuable beneﬁts by offering more precise
temporal granularity and a detailed network of connections that facilitate
thespreadofdiscourse17.However,feedalgorithmsmaynarrowtherangeof
content users see, primarily suggesting posts similar to those they already
engage with, which can introduce challenges18. For instance, social media
can restrict exposure to varied perspectives, fostering the formation of like-
minded groups and reinforcing shared narratives, an effect known as echo
chambers19.Accordingtogrouppolarizationandsocialidentitytheories,the
framingand agenda-settingwithintheseecho chamberspromptindividuals
to seek information that aligns with their beliefs and social identity, dee-
pening existing biases20. These effects can undermine climate action by
polarizing public views and fostering the spread of misinformation21.
In China, climate change discourse has traditionally followed a top-
down model, dominated by government agencies and news media9.
Framing analyses of mainstream media and newspapers reveal a focus on
large-scale narratives22, such as geopolitical boundaries of achievements and
attributionofresponsibility.However,ascommunicationincreasinglyshifts
to digital social media platforms, a broader array of opinion leaders now
engages in climate communication in China, such as non-governmental
1State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control and Resource Reuse, School of the Environment, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China. 2Institute for the Environment and
Health, Nanjing University Suzhou Campus, Suzhou, China. 3Basic Science Center for Energy and Climate Change, Beijing, China.
e-mail: liumm@nju.edu.cn;
liyuancolour@gmail.com; jbi@nju.edu.cn
Communications Earth & Environment |  (2025) 6:142 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;


organizations, celebrities, and grassroots groups. Recent studies suggest that
both the primary topics and the actors in climate change discussions on
Chinesesocialmediadifferfromthoseintraditionalmedia16.Nevertheless,a
signiﬁcant theoretical gap remains regarding how ofﬁcial and non-ofﬁcial
actors interact in these discussions. Given that audiences may have varying
preferences for information sources, it is unclear whether echo chambers
have formed among these actors, potentially hindering collective consensus
and action on climate issues.
In this study, we conduct a comprehensive descriptive data mining
analysis of Sina Weibo, one of China’s largest social media platforms, to
examine how climate change discourses are shaped by various actors and
their framing strategies (Fig. S1). Sina Weibo, launched in 2009, has emerged
as the country’s foremost social media platform, having 260 million daily
active users as of the ﬁrst quarter of 202323. Similar to Twitter (now ‘X’),
Weibo allows people to voice and exchange opinions, with inﬂuencers
actively engaging in discussions. Despite criticism for potential robot accounts
on the Weibo platform, overall, given its vast user base in China, Weibo
remains an ideal dataset for exploring public discourse on climate change24–26.
To investigate how ofﬁcial and non-ofﬁcial actors interact and parti-
cipate in climate change discussions on Weibo, we develop an analytical
framework that addresses key research questions regarding the triggering
events,opinionleadernetworks,andframingstrategiessurroundingclimate
change topics. RQ1: How has public attention to climate change evolved
over time, and what real-world events have triggered these discussions?
RQ2:Whoarethemainopinionleadersdrivingthediscourse,andhowdoes
opinion spread and interact among users? RQ3: What are the predominant
frames of climate change frequently used by opinion leaders?
To address these questions, this study analyzed 5.3 million original
posts containing climate change keywords on Weibo, spanning from 2012
to 2022. We ﬁrst developed an Online Attention Metric (OAM) index to
track weekly ﬂuctuations in the intensity of online debates. To link these
peaks with speciﬁc real-world events, we applied the Biterm Topic Model
(BTM) to summarize the main topics in the Weibo posts associated with
each peak. This topic modeling technique captures co-occurrence patterns
of word pairs (i.e., biterms) across the entire corpus, making it particularly
effective for analyzing short texts, such as social media posts or forum
discussions. We identiﬁed 48 real-world events that triggered spikes in
discussion (Table S1). Using network analysis, we identiﬁed seven groups of
opinion leaders who shape the discourse and mapped their interaction
networks. Finally, we applied text analysis and language models to parse the
frames frequently adopted by different actors during speciﬁc real-world
events.
Based on the identiﬁcation of opinion leaders, we categorized them as
having either ofﬁcial or unofﬁcial backgrounds by reviewing their veriﬁed
status and personal proﬁles. Drawing on group polarization and social
identity theories27,28, audiences cluster around different types of opinion
leaders, reinforcing their social identities through establishing relatively
ﬁxed frames and viewpoints within their respective echo chambers.
Therefore, we propose the following hypothesis:
H1: Opinion leaders from ofﬁcial and unofﬁcial backgrounds create
echo chambers, with each group engaging in unique ways in online dis-
cussions triggered by real-world climate events.
In addition, according to the message framing and agenda-setting
theories29,30, media and opinion leaders may inﬂuence audience perceptions
by emphasizing certain topics and presenting information in speciﬁc ways,
shaping the public understanding and perceived importance of climate
issues. Thus, we further hypothesize:
H2:Theframingofclimatechangemessagesvarieswithspeciﬁcevents,
and the prevalence of certain frames differs between ofﬁcial and unofﬁcial
opinion leaders.
Results
Event-driven climate change online discussions in China
Usingourself-developedOnlineAttentionMetric(OAM)index,wetracked
the intensity and engagement of climate change discussions on Weibo,
revealing a gradual upward trend with periodic spikes (Fig.S2).After March
2018, there was a marked surge in attention toward climate change, nearly
doubling in volume (Fig. S3). The ﬂuctuating trend indicates that climate
changediscussionsontheChinesesocialmediaplatformarestronglydriven
by speciﬁc events.
We then used the z-score method to detect all instances of peak OAM
data from 2012 to 2022, identifying a total of 48 signiﬁcant peaks. To link
these peaks with speciﬁc real-world events, we applied the Biterm Topic
Model (BTM) to summarize the main topics in the Weibo posts associated
with each peak. This topic modeling technique captures co-occurrence
patterns of word pairs (i.e., biterms) across the entire corpus, making it
particularly effective for analyzing short texts, such as social media posts or
forum discussions31. Based on the topics extracted by BTM, we manually
veriﬁed the associated real-world events and categorized them into ﬁve
groups: Online Activities, International Conferences, Extreme Weather,
Domestic Policy, and International News (Fig. S4).
Figure 1 illustrates speciﬁc events within each group alongside their
posting timelines. A general trend observed is the increased prominence of
discussions on domestic policies and international diplomacy news related
to climate change after 2018. Online Activities contain 12 events (e.g., the
Earth Hour) about online environmental movements aimed to raise
awareness about climate change. International Conferences refer to global
climate change gatherings such as the United Nations Climate Change
Conference of the Parties (COPs). Extreme Weather includes severe
weather phenomena associated with climate change, with summer heat-
wave garnering the most attention. Domestic Policy refers to policy trends,
conferences, and news regarding domestic affairs. International News is
mainly about China’s participation in global climate change governance, or
the dynamic of China-US diplomatic relations.
We further proﬁled users who participated in climate change discus-
sions. Based on veriﬁcation status on Weibo, we observed that a high pro-
portion of blue-V users (enterprises, institutions, and media organizations)
shared posts related to International Conferences, while a greater number of
yellow-V users (mainly celebrities or self-media creators) were involved in
posts of International News (Fig. S5). General unveriﬁed accounts were
found to be more active in expressing opinions regarding Domestic Policies.
Based on the account followers (Fig. S6), we noted substantial variations in
the levels of inﬂuence among participants in each topic. International
Conferences tended to feature highly inﬂuential ﬁgures (with over 1 million
followers). Conversely, topics related to the Domestic Policies attracted
followers numbering in the few hundred range.
Finally, we located users who posted original weibos during the peak
events and reported their geographical addresses (Fig. S7). The majority of
users were located in the highly developed Eastern Coastal provinces,
notably Beijing, Shanghai, and Guangdong. A substantial number of Weibo
posts originated from users withIP addressesin foreign countries. Accounts
from the United States ranked within the top eight, alongside all Chinese
provinces, likely inﬂuenced by the presence of global institutions like the
United Nations headquartered there. These ﬁndings highlight the active
engagement of international organizations on Chinese social media
platforms.
To provide deeperinsights into public attitudes toward these issues, we
calculated sentiment scores for each Weibo post during the 48 peak events,
with scores ranging from 0 to 100. Figure 2 shows the annual sentiment
score results, highlighting the temporal trend over time. We also conducted
qualitative content analysis to explore the themes in user-generated text
(Table S2).
We found during the winter of 2013, a notable decrease in emotional
expression was evident, primarily attributed to the haze crisis in January
2013. We observed low median sentiment scores of 47, 51, and 51 in
response to event #8 (Haze event), event #5 (Haze control policy), and event
#6 (Earth Hour). We also noticed a general decreasing trend in public
emotions following the global COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. Apart from
events related to domestic policies where local mainstream voices may
dominate, the average sentiment for all other events has generally decreased
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-025-02124-4
Article
Communications Earth & Environment |  (2025) 6:142 
2


since 2020. The t-test conducted on the two sets of data before and after
COVID-19 showed a signiﬁcant change in emotions (Table S3)32,33.
Despite the inﬂuence of the 2013 haze crisis and the COVID-19
pandemic, widespread public engagement with online activities and
international conferences generally evoked positive emotions, with
average scores exceeding 80. Discussions about domestic climate poli-
cies have also intensiﬁed, particularly in recent years, and have elicited
positive emotions.
Public response to international news exhibits more ﬂuctuations,
especially concerning news involving US-China relations. The two lowest
peak sentiment scores have median of 52 and 56 for International News
following the U.S. announcement of its withdrawal from the Paris Agree-
ment (event #5), and when climate talks between China and the U.S. were
temporarily stalled (event #48).
Networks of online climate change opinion leaders
ToidentifyclimatechangeopinionleadersonChina’ssocialmediaplatform
and analyze their interactions, we developed a social network model based
on text similarity. This approach addresses the challenge that Weibo data
collected via APIs lacks post-repost relationships between accounts. It also
has the advantage of identifying inﬂuencers who share similar opinions,
even if they have no direct interactions. High text similarity between two
users indicates shared attitudes toward climate change, placing them closer
in the network with stronger connections. For each event category, we
selected the event with the highest OAM score as a representative to con-
struct the networks, as illustrated in Fig. 3. To enhance clarity, we included
onlythe top 100mostinﬂuentialusersperevent,measuredbythecombined
total of comments, likes, and reposts on their posts. Table S4 shows that the
numberoffollowersandofﬁcialbackgroundarethemainfactorsforusersto
become opinion leaders.
The accounts of opinion leaders during these real-world events were
manually reviewed and were categorized into three groups based on their
account names, self-descriptions, and primary content, which included
news media, institutions, and personal and business accounts (Fig. S8).
Within the news media category, three distinct types of outlets were
identiﬁed: central ofﬁcial media, local media and unofﬁcial media,
Fig. 1 | The timeline of 48 real-world peak events. The ﬁve primary event categories were delineated using different colors. Each event is brieﬂy described with a short
summary of its main content.
Fig. 2 | The sentiment scores of climate change discussions on Weibo during 48
peak events. Boxplots depict the distribution of sentiment scores per event, where
higher score denotes positive emotion and lower score denotes negative emotion.
Each box is color-coded based on the median value, with darker shades representing
lower scores. Light red rectangles highlight events occurring after 2020, the global
COVID-19 pandemic. Blue lines illustrate the temporal trend of annual median
sentiments.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-025-02124-4
Article
Communications Earth & Environment |  (2025) 6:142 
3


categorized based on their ownership structures. Institutions were clas-
siﬁed into three types, including universities, government agencies of
China, and international institutions. Personal accounts mainly com-
prised enterprises, celebrities, and grassroots individuals. Table S5 lists
the top 20 opinion leaders’ names and their account types for each
representative event.
Theseopinionleadersexhibitedvaryingactivitiesobservedduringeach
peak event. In analyzing the “Online Activities” event group, we focused on
the Earth Hour initiative in 2019. We found that among the top 100
inﬂuentialaccounts,personalaccounts(40)anduniversities(20)emergedas
the most actively engaged entities. They formed two distinct clusters with
tight connections. Local media (13) and government agency accounts (12)
also showed notable activity but with loose connections. Central ofﬁcial
media and international institutions are fewer in number and relatively
isolated but yield signiﬁcant inﬂuence in public engagement.
For the “International Conferences,” we chose the COP27 event held
in 2022 as the case. Our analysis revealed the presence of a single large
cluster, with central nodes predominantly occupied by international
institutions with the highest inﬂuence. Key players included prominent
entities such as the United Nations (UN) and the UN Environment Pro-
gramme (UNEP). Moreover, we observed a growing signiﬁcance attributed
to central ofﬁcial media (25), local media (17), and government agencies
(15) within this cluster.
The network dynamics observed during the 2018 summer heatwave
event were notably diverse, characterized by active involvement of local
media (37) and personal & business accounts (25). We noted only a few
Fig. 3 | Opinion leaders and their social networks identiﬁed by text similarity in
ﬁve representative peak events. A Seven distinct types of opinion leaders were
identiﬁed and distinguished using different colors. Their social networks, based on text
similarities in Weibo posts, were visualized in a circular layout for the ﬁve repre-
sentative peak events. The size of each node corresponds to its inﬂuence, measured by
the total number of reposts. The usernames of top opinion leaders are indicated on the
plot. The transparency of edges reﬂects the text similarity between the connected
users. B The upper panel illustrates the percentage of connections within and between
ofﬁcial and unofﬁcial user nodes. The lower panel depicts the inﬂuence of each
opinion leader group across different events, measured by the total number of reposts.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-025-02124-4
Article
Communications Earth & Environment |  (2025) 6:142 
4


smallnetworks,apatternlikelyinﬂuencedbygeographicaldisparities.Users
situated in various locations may engage with the event in distinct manners.
During the “Two Sessions” in 2022, one of the most important political
gatherings in China, we found central ofﬁcial agencies (20), such as People’s
Daily, CCTV, and Xinhua News Agency, produced highly inﬂuential weibo
posts in addressing climate change. Several small networks were formulated
by these accounts. Subsequently, a high level of participation was observed
from accounts belonging to government agencies of China (40) (Fig. S9).
These accounts played a crucial role in interpreting policies.
Regarding “International News,” we chose the event of Trump’s
announcement to withdraw from the Paris Agreement in 2017. We
observed the largest network with the highest number of connections
(Fig. S10). Central ofﬁcial media (25), unofﬁcial media (32), and personal
and business accounts (24) collectively lead online discussion. Key nodes
continue to be dominated by central ofﬁcial media outlets. For unofﬁcial
media, prominent accounts are mostly current affairs commentary plat-
forms with large user base, such as Observer and Phoenix News. Personal
accounts of self-media creators and individual commentators also actively
engage in the discussion.
To test Hypothesis #1, we conducted two quantitative analyses to
determine whether ofﬁcial and unofﬁcial users have formed two indepen-
dent echo chambers. We categorized the seven types of opinion leaders into
either ofﬁcial or unofﬁcial groups based on their proﬁles. The upperpanelof
Fig. 3B illustrates the interactions within and between these two groups,
represented as percentages of all node connections. The results indicate that
interactions within each group exceed those across groups, particularly for
discussions about the Earth Hour and COP27. For topics such as the
summer heatwave and the Two Sessions political gathering, conversations
are dominantly driven by unofﬁcial and ofﬁcial accounts respectively.
Interestingly, the U.S. withdrawal from the Paris Agreement stands out, as it
generates signiﬁcantly higher interconnections between ofﬁcial and unof-
ﬁcial users than within either group. The lower panel of Fig. 3B highlights
the inﬂuence of each group, measured by the total number of reposts ori-
ginating from these opinion leaders. Notably, the inﬂuence trends align
closely with the observed within-group connections. These ﬁndings suggest
that the presence of echo chambers on China’s social media, separating
ofﬁcial and unofﬁcial users, varies depending on the speciﬁc climate change
event. Certain geopolitical events appear to disrupt these chambers, fos-
tering increased mutual engagement and breaking traditional silos.
Main framing of climate change adopted by opinion leaders
Media framing is the process of organizing and presenting information,
involving the selection of certain aspects of perceived reality to make them
prominent. Our classiﬁcation of the main frames on Weibo refers to
existing climate narrative methods, which lay the foundation for com-
paring and enriching the public’s perception of climate change reported in
previous studies34. Common climate narrative frames include climate
change opposition framework, global governance framework, climate
justice framework, and ecological crisis framework35–37. Although these
frameworks provide valuable perspectives, in-depth analysis of climate
narratives needs to be further reﬁned and supplemented based on actual
data, especially in the social and cultural context of China. Therefore, we
propose a climate narrative framework for Chinese social media by inte-
grating insights from the above literature and our text analysis results.
Through the word co-occurrence analysis, the top 135 phrases across
opinion leaders’ Weibo posts were classiﬁed into seven main types of
climate change frames, and their connections are illustrated in Fig. 4A.
Detailed phrases related to each can be found in Table S6.
The “China-US relations” revolves around phrases concerning US
presidents, advocating for collaboration, and debating controversies related
to COVID-19. The “personal actions” focuses on day-to-day behaviors that
individuals can undertake to mitigate climate change. The “political will”
frame emphasizes the commitment to address climate change, with typical
phrases including carbon peak and ecological civilization. The “mitigation”
is characterized by phrases highlighting emission reduction goals and
measures for transitioning to the low-carbon economy. The “global initia-
tive” includes keywordsrelated to internationalnegotiationsand diplomatic
concepts. The “scientiﬁc reality” focuses on scientiﬁc ﬁndings or reports
concerning the causes and impacts of climate change, often containing
imageries like polar bears. Lastly, the “economy and society” underscores
how addressing climate change aligns with the pursuit of high-quality
economic development.
Examining the ﬁve representative peak events as case studies, we
investigated the popularity of frames among opinion leaders to examine
Hypothesis #2 (Fig. 4B). We also directly compared the percentage of using
different frames between ofﬁcial and unofﬁcial user groups (Fig. 4C). On
average, unofﬁcial users are more likely to adopt frames such as China-U.S.
relations, scientiﬁc realities, socio-economic impacts, and personal actions.
In contrast, users with ofﬁcial backgrounds emphasize political will and
mitigation policy frames. A chi-square test of association between user
background and frame adoption reveals statistically signiﬁcant differences
incertainframes(TableS7),whileotheruserindicesarenotthemainfactors
affecting the adoption of frames (Table S8).
Central ofﬁcial media and government agency accounts tend to focus
more on national political themes compared to other ofﬁcial accounts.
During COP27, 55.8% of posts from ofﬁcial accounts employed the “global
initiatives” and “political will” frames, signiﬁcantly higher than the 21.0%
from unofﬁcial accounts. Similarly, during the 2022 “Two Sessions,” 61.6%
of posts from ofﬁcial accounts focused on frames like “political will” and
“mitigation,” compared to 33.6% from unofﬁcial accounts.
Incontrast, unofﬁcialaccounts,primarilypersonal, business,and some
unofﬁcial media outlets, engage more with frames related to scientiﬁc rea-
lities, socio-economic impacts, and China-U.S. relations. For instance, fol-
lowing Trump’s 2017 announcement of the U.S. withdrawal from the Paris
Agreement, 43.2% of posts discussing the event came from these groups,
reﬂecting how climate discussions intersect with personal lives and inter-
national affairs. Additionally, 66.0% of their posts during the 2018 summer
heatwave focused on highlighting the scientiﬁc realities of climate change
and promoting personal actions. These ﬁndings underscore the diverse
strategies used by different groups in shaping climate discussions on Chi-
nese social media. Framing preferences are strongly inﬂuenced by account
types and their primary audience demographics.
Discussions
Inthisstudy,weconductedanin-depthanalysisofthediscussionsregarding
climate change on China’s social media platforms over the past decade. Our
investigation uncovered notable patterns driven by periodic events and
identiﬁed inﬂuential ﬁgures alongside their strategic framing within the
context of Chinese culture and political system. We have summarized
several unique landscapes in terms of main participants, opinion leaders,
network structures, and the content of discussions about climate change
between ofﬁcial and unofﬁcial users. These ﬁndings highlight the impor-
tance of tailored strategies to promote global climate action at the local level
and through digital new media platforms.
On Chinese social media platforms, grassroots personal accounts
remain the key participants in discussions about climate change, con-
stituting more than four-ﬁfths of engaged accounts during peak events.
Nevertheless, state-owned ofﬁcial media and certain local government
agencies show higher levels of public engagement, especially regarding
topics related to domestic climate change policies. This pattern can be
explained through agenda-setting and source credibility theories. First,
governmentcampaignsandeducationalinitiativesaretypicallyorganizedin
a top-down manner to promote local conservation and advance policies38.
Second, ofﬁcial media outlets are perceived by the Chinese public as more
trustworthy, authoritative, and thus more inclined to be engaged with39,40. In
contrast, individual political ﬁgures, radio commentators, scientists, and
journalists, who are reported as key actors in Western studies41, have less
impact in the Chinese context.
In examining social networks, we have observed unique patterns
regarding user interaction and the exchange of opinions on social media
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-025-02124-4
Article
Communications Earth & Environment |  (2025) 6:142 
5


platforms. Existing studies have shown that strong political polarization
fosters fragmented climate change opinions and forms distinct information
chambers5,42. Conservatives are more likely to express skepticism or denial
of climate change, while liberals are inclined to acknowledge its existence
and advocate for action43,44. This divide is evident in the content shared and
discussions held on platforms like Twitter and Facebook, where users often
segregate into two main networks and engage in debates that align with
their ideological leanings45. In China, the scientiﬁc consensus on climate
change is widely disseminated and accepted, and there have been
numerous national surveys that show climate skepticism is not prevalent in
the country10,46. In this study, we found that climate change-related net-
works in China are generally sparse and small, primarily driven by similar
entities such as universities, unofﬁcial media, and government agencies.
Our ﬁndings partially support Hypothesis #1, indicating the presence of an
echo chamber effect between ofﬁcial and unofﬁcial users, but this effect
varies depending on speciﬁc real-world events. For example, issues like
China-U.S. relations appear to disrupt this echo chamber. Besides, different
framing strategies are employed by these two groups to engage the public,
disseminate scientiﬁc consensus, and interpret domestic climate policies,
which supports Hypothesis #2.
Our ﬁndings indicate that the Chinese public generally holds a positive
view of the country’s efforts in addressing climate change. This sentiment
extends beyond the promotion of domestic climate policies, which previous
studies have suggested may be inﬂuenced by state-owned media and gov-
ernment agencies16. It is also evident in numerous online activities where
personal accounts engage in discussions favoring green transition and sus-
tainable development. However, there are three categories of real-world
events, namely haze crises, COVID-19, and China-US relations, that tend to
diminish positive response. Previous research highlights a growing awareness
and concern about environmental issues, leading to a misconception of
global climate change as local air pollution10. This may result in increased
levels of concern and anxiety during haze events47,48. COVID-19, as a global
crisis, has also affected the Chinese public emotions. We found a greater
expression of worries and concerns, reﬂected in signiﬁcantly lower sentiment
scores. Finally, Weibo platform questions perceived inconsistency and
reversals in U.S. climate policy, typically accompanied by negative emotions.
It fosters a narrative that frames climate change not only as an environmental
challenge but also as a strategic arena in international power dynamics49.
Several strategies to promote climate change initiatives can be used
within the Chinese context. While we do not ﬁnd strong political
Fig. 4 | Framing of climate change and its utilization by opinion leaders on the
online social media platform. A The word co-occurrence network illustrating the
main phrases and their communities. Seven primary frames were identiﬁed and
delineated using distinct colors. B Distribution of frame popularity among various
types of opinion leaders during ﬁve representative peak events. C The use of climate
narrative frames by ofﬁcial and unofﬁcial users across ﬁve events.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-025-02124-4
Article
Communications Earth & Environment |  (2025) 6:142 
6


polarization regarding opinions on climate change, there are numerous
smaller networksfragmented across groups. For instance, youngpeople and
females are more inclined to participate in online activities initiated by
celebrities or universities. It is crucial to foster targeted communication
initiativesand enhanceinteractionsamongawiderrangeofusers.Then,our
analysis revealed that extreme weather events triggering intense online
responses were primarily limited to heatwaves or coldwaves. More localized
hazards, such as ﬂoods, hurricanes, and wildﬁres, were not adequately
detectedin our study. It is vital toseize opportunities during natural hazards
to reinforce the connections between climate change and catastrophic
events, thereby enhancing public awareness.
Our data and methodology offer a valuable tool for tracking and
understanding the Chinese public’s responses to climate change issues.
However, we acknowledge several inherent limitations in utilizing the
Weibo big data collected in this study. First, our analysis is limited to
understandingthe communicationpatternsof Weibo users,which hampers
our ability to explain phenomena in regions with limited development and
among elderly populations due to their lower internet access and preference
for social media usage. Second, our study focuses on analyzing inﬂuential
accountsratherthancapturingthevoicesofthegeneralpublic.Forexample,
Weibo discussions related to “extreme weather” events are mainly inﬂu-
enced by weather forecasts from news media, leading to relatively positive
emotions compared to our initial expectations. Third, the data collected
from social media are event-driven, providing insights into public responses
to speciﬁc real-world issues. However, it remains unclear how individuals
conceptualizeandinterpretthesecomplexclimatechangeissuesthemselves.
Employing heuristic methods becomes necessary to gain insight into what
climate change truly means to them50. Finally, the Weibo data are analyzed
at a group level and lack detailed user information such as socio-demo-
graphics, personal beliefs, and cultural contexts. In addition, some infor-
mation provided inuserproﬁlescannot be veriﬁed foraccuracy. Combining
social media big data with traditional questionnaires is essential to resolve
these challenges and enhance the validity and reliability of the ﬁndings.
Methods
Data collection and preprocessing
SinaWeiboisamassivelypopularmicro-bloggingsocialmediasiteinChina
similartoTwitter(now‘X’).Usersarelimitedto2000Chinesecharactersper
post, with only the initial 140 characters visible at ﬁrst glance (a link is
provided to access the full post). Users may incorporate external links,
images, multimedia content, and emoticons in weibos. We developed an
algorithm using Scrapy, an open-source crawling framework in Python51.
This algorithm automatically retrieved historical posts based on speciﬁc
keywords through Weibo’s application programming interface (API). The
data mining process workﬂow was outlined in Text S1. In this study, we
employed the Chinese term for “climate change” as the keyword to ﬁlter the
search sequence during the summer of 2023. The historical search time-
frame was set from January 2012 to December 2022. Data collection began
in March 2023 and took 6 months to complete. The ﬁnal dataset has a total
of 5.3 million original posts from 2.2 million distinct users from 31 Chinese
provinces.
The obtained data ﬁelds include the original text content of the Weibo
posts, number of likes, comments, or reposts, and publishing time. We also
retrieved user-related information, including user ID, account name, ver-
iﬁcation status, personal introduction, number of followers and followings,
geographic location, etc. Weibo veriﬁcation is the process of obtaining an
ofﬁcial account status. The main veriﬁcation types encompass personal
accounts (celebrities, commenters, scholars, etc.) and organizations or insti-
tutions (enterprises, government agencies, news media, etc.). This facilitates
our identiﬁcation of key inﬂuencers. The location of each account is deter-
mined based on the user’s most recent geo-tagged posts or self-reported geo-
location in their proﬁle (Fig. S11). The data preprocessing process is outlined
in Text S2. We performed a correlation analysis between the number of users
and the total population for each province. The results showed a signiﬁcant
correlation, afﬁrming the spatial representativeness of our data (Fig. S12).
We then performed a few data preprocessing steps for further textual
analysis. We ﬁrst detected and removed robots, here deﬁned as accounts
posting more than 50 Weibo posts per day. Duplicate posts made by the
same user on the same day were identiﬁed and removed, keeping only one
post. After removing the unqualiﬁed data as described, this study obtained a
ﬁnal database of 3.1 million valid posts from 1.3 million users. We then
cleaned redundant information from original texts such as stop-words,
URLs, whitespaces, numbers, and punctuations. The preprocessing efforts
ensured clean and relevant textual data for downstream mining and
modeling tasks.
Major events detection
To detect real-world events that may trigger hot online debates of climate
change in Chinese online social media platform, here we deﬁned an Online
AttentionMetric(OAM)thatmeasuresthedailydynamicsofinterestareal-
world event receives. The metric is deﬁned as formula (1).
OAMw ¼
X
7
t¼1
Engagementt × Popularityt
ð1Þ
The OAMw was computed weekly, generating a time series reﬂecting
publicattentiontoclimatechangeissuesontheWeiboplatform.Thismetric
consists of two primary parameters. Popularityt computes the total number
of Weibo posts related to climate change per day. Engagementt serves as a
weighting variable, quantifying the level of public engagement with each
post. The formula (2) below illustrates the calculation process for
Engagementt:
Engagement ¼ log10 likes þ comments þ reposts


ð2Þ
Three ﬁelds related to different types of engagement with each post
were considered, including the number of likes, comments, and reposts. We
computed the average sum of these counts, then applied a common loga-
rithmic transformation to reduce the inﬂuenceof extreme numbers, and the
min-max normalization to convert each data value to a range
between 0 and 1.
We then applied a robust peak detection algorithm based on Z-score
on the weekly OAM streams, to detect hot-debated online events. The
principle is that if the OAM for a week is a certain number of standard
deviations away from a moving average, the algorithm signals a signiﬁcant
peaking event52. In this study, the Z-score of the OAM per week is calculated
using the formula (3) below, with a lagging window of 5 weeks and a
threshold set at 3 standard deviations away from the moving average to be
labeled as a peak. A total of 48 spikes in online discussions about climate
change in China were identiﬁed between 2012 and 2022.
z ¼ OAMwμw
σw
μw ¼ 1
5
P
2
i¼2
OAMwþi
σw ¼ standard deviation
ð3Þ
Topic modeling and sentiment analysis
To link each peak with a corresponding real-world event, we collected all
Weibo posts published on those dates and then applied Biterm Topic
Modeling, an advanced Natural language processing (NLP) technique to
help extractvaluable information from text data. Topic modeling is effective
in identifying topics or themes present in a collection of documents. Biterm
Topic Modeling (BTM) is one of the most cutting-edge algorithms, espe-
cially suited for short-text analysis. Recent literature has reported that BTM
outperforms some traditional topic models, such as Latent Dirichlet Allo-
cation (LDA), when dealing with short texts like tweets and Weibo posts53.
We inputtedpostsfromtheselected peakdateperiodintothe BTMfortopic
modeling. We determined the optimal number of topic categories to be 5
based on the perplexity of the computational topic model (Fig. S13). The
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-025-02124-4
Article
Communications Earth & Environment |  (2025) 6:142 
7


topic model outputs the top few keywords for the 5 topics and the topic
distribution probability θ for each post, these details and results are detailed
in Text S3 and Table S9. We labeled each post with the highest θ as the topic
of this post, which ﬁnally categorized them into ﬁve groups.
To measure the sentiment of climate change Weibo posts, we
employed a Pre-trained Language Model, Chinese-BERT-wwm, released by
the Joint Laboratory of HIT and iFLYTEK Research54 for analysis. This is an
enhanced version of the state-of-the-art big language models in text clas-
siﬁcation, i.e., Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers
(BERT). The BERT model is built upon Transformers, a deep learning
architecture that can understand word in a sentence byconsidering both left
and right contexts55. It is achieved through pre-training on extensive col-
lections of text data. Chinese-BERT-wwm is speciﬁcally customized for
processing Chinese short texts, having been pre-trained on a dataset of one
million Chinese tweets labeled with positive or negative sentiment. It has
demonstrated a remarkable accuracy of up to 95% in sentence sentiment
classiﬁcation56. In our study, we randomly sampled 1000 instancesfrom our
dataset and compared the classiﬁcation performance of Chinese-BERT-
wwm with traditional techniques. The results showed that the model
achievedanaccuracyimprovementof30%and10%comparedtodictionary
matching approaches and neural network models like Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) (Tables S10 and 11). Table S12 shows the robustness
analysis of sentiment analysis and topic models. The limitations of senti-
ment analysis and topic models are stated in Text S4.
Social network analysis based on text similarity
To explore the process of information spread on social media platform and
identify the role of inﬂuencers, it is essential to build a network that illus-
trates the engagement dynamics among users, such as reposts. However, a
signiﬁcant challenge with Weibo data collected from APIs is the absence of
post-repost relationships between accounts. We addressed this challenge by
introducing a network analysis technique based on text similarities. This
approach overcomes the limitation of the absence of post-repost links
between accounts and offers the advantage of identifying inﬂuencers who
share similar opinions, even in the absence of direct interactions.
To assess text similarities among Weibo posts, we utilized a word
embedding model based on BERT to convert each post into a continuous
vectorspace.Bycalculating the cosineangle between vector representations,
we measure the extent of similarity between two Weibo posts in relation to
their word usage and frequency. More technical details for calculating text
cosine similarity can be found in Text S5. We conducted text similarity
analysis on Weibo posts related to the ﬁve event categories. The results
indicated that during the early phase of each event, a large number of posts
exhibited high similarity (Fig. S14). It presents that inﬂuential accounts ﬁrst
published posts, which were then copied or slightly modiﬁed by their fol-
lowers. This similarity gradually decreased over time, suggesting a potential
dissemination pattern for these climate-related posts and more diverse
interpretations by other accounts. Hence, we can infer opinion similarities
between two users and their potential post-repost connections.
Therefore, we chose the event with the highest peak from each event
category and constructed the corresponding Weibo text similarity matrix
for building networks. For each event category, we identiﬁed the top 100
most inﬂuential accounts as nodes. Source and target nodes were deter-
mined based on the time of posting. The inﬂuence of an account was
quantiﬁedbythesumoflikes,reposts,andcommentsreceivedfromitsposts
relatedtothespeciﬁcevent.Onlyconnectionsbetweentwonodeswithatext
similarityexceeding 0.7 were used as the edges. To validate the robustness of
our ﬁndings, we calculated several centrality measures to identify key nodes
in the network, including PageRank, eigenvector centrality, and between-
ness centrality (Table S13). The correlations between these centrality
measures were above 0.5 for all events, with some exceeding 0.8.
The network was then analyzed in open-access software Gephi57. To
visualize the network, we chose a circular layout and the gravity was set as
0.8. A Fruchterman Reingold algorithm was used to detect the distribution
patternbydetectingthemainmodularityandinteractionsamongnodes58.It
allows nodes with inherent connections to be closer, while nodes without
connections tend to be repelled, thus forming distinguishable community
structures within the network. The thickness of edges was determined by
text similarity, and the node size was determined by their weibos’ overall
inﬂuence and public engagement. This approach allows us to gain a more
insightful understanding of the propagation patterns and potential depen-
dencies among users.
We proceeded to manually classify these opinion leaders based on
account bio and description, veriﬁed account types, and primary content
focus. These accounts were sorted into seven categories: central ofﬁcial
media, local media, unofﬁcial media, universities, government agencies of
China, international institutions, and personal and business accounts. We
then identiﬁed the top twenty most inﬂuential users for each event and
indicated their account types on the circular network plot to analyze their
roles as opinion leaders in climate change discussions. To test the two
hypotheses proposed in this study, we further categorized these users into
ofﬁcial and unofﬁcial accounts.
Identifying framing of climate change used by opinion leaders
Analyzing the framing of climate change employed by opinion leaders is
crucial due to the close connections of social media users, which can lead to
the ampliﬁcation of certain viewpoints. To identify the framing strategies
used by key opinion leaders, we systematically examined Weibo posts by
inﬂuential opinion leaders identiﬁed through social network analysis. We
tokenized these posts and calculated the frequency of occurrence for each
tokenized phrase, ultimately generating a collection of 135 distinct phrases
afterremovingduplicates.Next,weconstructedadocument-wordmatrixto
quantify the distribution probability of key terms in each document. By
multiplying this matrix with its transpose, we derived a word co-occurrence
matrix, where higher values indicate a greater likelihood of two words
appearing together and thus reﬂecting similar frames.
Utilizing this word co-occurrence matrix, we created a network where
phrases served as nodes and their co-occurrence frequencies as weighted
edges. Employing a Louvain community detection algorithm, we categor-
ized these phrases into seven distinct groups, with a modularity output of
0.529, indicating a reasonable classiﬁcation (Fig. S15). More details about
the process are presented in Text S6. We manually parsed the words
involved in each group and identiﬁed them as seven main frames of climate
change.
Finally, we sought to analyze how opinion leaders employed framing
techniques to express their viewpoints by categorizing each Weibo post
from opinion leaders into one of the seven framing categories. This process
involvedcalculatingthefrequencyofmentionsforeachofthe135phrasesin
every Weibo post. We then assigned each post to the framing category that
corresponded to the highest frequency of mentioned phrases within that
category. We calculated the proportion of posts in which ofﬁcial and
unofﬁcial users employed speciﬁc frames during each event, providing a
clear and comprehensive understanding of how framing varied among
opinion leaders during these keymoments. These calculations helped reveal
their frame preferences.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio
Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The processed dataset can be obtained from: https://doi.org/10.5281/
zenodo.14096539.
Code availability
The code can be found at the following link: https://github.com/
njuYaxinhu/ChineseSocialMedia.
Received: 4 August 2024; Accepted: 12 February 2025;
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-025-02124-4
Article
Communications Earth & Environment |  (2025) 6:142 
8


References
1.
Kousser, T. & Tranter, B. The inﬂuence of political leaders on climate
change attitudes. Glob. Environ. Change 50, 100–109 (2018).
2.
Mearns, R. & Norton, A. Social Dimensions of Climate Change: Equity
and Vulnerability in a Warming World (World Bank Publications, 2009).
3.
Ricke, K. L. & Caldeira, K. Natural climate variability and future climate
policy. Nat. Clim. Change 4, 333–338 (2014).
4.
Tanner, T. et al. Livelihood resilience in the face of climate change.
Nat. Clim. Change 5, 23–26 (2015).
5.
Falkenberg, M. et al. Growing polarization around climate change on
social media. Nat. Clim. Change 12, 1114–1121 (2022).
6.
Urwin, K. & Jordan, A. Does public policy support or undermine
climatechangeadaptation? Exploring policy interplayacrossdifferent
scales of governance. Glob. Environ. Change 18, 180–191 (2008).
7.
Wetts, R. In climate news, statements from large businesses and
opponents of climate action receive heightened visibility. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 117, 19054–19060 (2020).
8.
Meckling, J. & Karplus, V. J. Political strategies for climate and
environmental solutions. Nat. Sustain.6, 742–751 (2023).
9.
Liu, J. C.-E. & Zhao, B. Who speaks for climate change in China?
Evidence from Weibo. Clim. Change 140, 413–422 (2017).
10. Yang, J., Gounaridis, D., Liu, M., Bi, J. & Newell, J. P. Perceptions of
climate change in China: evidence from surveys of residents in six
cities. Earth’s Future 9, e2021EF002144 (2021).
11. Sun, Y., Jia, R., Razzaq, A. & Bao, Q. Social network platforms and
climate change in China: evidence from TikTok. Technol. Forecast.
Soc. Change 200, 123197 (2024).
12. Shen, C. & Wang, Y. Concerned or apathetic? Exploring online public
opinions on climate change from 2008 to 2019: a comparative study
between China and other G20 countries. J. Environ. Manag. 332,
117376 (2023).
13. Ilieva, R. T. & McPhearson, T. Social-media data for urban
sustainability. Nat. Sustain.1, 553–565 (2018).
14. Khoa, B. T. & Huynh, T. T. Knowledge-intensive teamwork
development through social media adoption after the COVID-19
pandemic in higher education institutions. Heliyon 10, e26210 (2024).
15. Shen, C. & Wang, Y. How does public concern about climate change
affect carbon emissions? Evidence from large-scale online content
and provincial-level data in China. J. Clean. Prod. 426, 139137 (2023).
16. Zeng, L. Chinese public perception of climate change onsocial media:
an investigation based on data mining and text analysis. J. Environ.
Public Health 2022, 6294436 (2022).
17. Maynard, D., Roberts, I., Greenwood, M. A., Rout, D. & Bontcheva, K.
A framework for real-time semantic social media analysis. J. Web
Semant. 44, 75–88 (2017).
18. Pagan,N., Mei, W., Li, C. & Dörﬂer, F. A meritocraticnetworkformation
model for the rise of social media inﬂuencers. Nat. Commun. 12, 6865
(2021).
19. Cinelli,M.,De FrancisciMorales,G.,Galeazzi,A., Quattrociocchi, W.&
Starnini, M. The echo chamber effect on social media. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 118, e2023301118 (2021).
20. Mackie, D. M. Social identiﬁcation effects in group polarization. J.
Pers. Soc. Psychol. 50, 720 (1986).
21. Bolsen, T. & Shapiro, M. A. The US news media, polarization on
climate change, and pathways to effective communication. Environ.
Commun. 12, 149–163 (2018).
22. Wozniak, A., Lück, J. & Wessler, H. Frames, stories, and images: the
advantages of a multimodal approach in comparative media content
research on climate change. Environ. Commun. 9, 469–490 (2015).
23. Shi, W.-z et al. Online public opinion during the ﬁrst epidemic wave of
COVID-19 in China based on Weibo data. Humanit. Soc. Sci.
Commun. 9, 159 (2022).
24. Ji, J., Hu, T., Chen, Z. & Zhu, M. Exploring the climate change
discourse on Chinese social media and the role of social bots. Asian J.
Commun. 34, 109–128 (2024).
25. Lu, L., Xu, J., Wei, J., Shults, F. L. & Feng, X. L. The role of emotion and
social connection during the COVID-19 pandemic phase transitions:a
cross-cultural comparison of China and the United States. Humanit.
Soc. Sci. Commun. 11, 1–16 (2024).
26. Wang, W. et al. Exploring the construction and inﬁltration strategies of
social bots in Sina Microblog. Sci. Rep. 10, 19821 (2020).
27. Hogg, M. A. Social Identity Theory (Springer, 2016).
28. Myers, D. G. & Lamm, H. The group polarization phenomenon.
Psychol. Bull. 83, 602 (1976).
29. Smith, S. M. & Petty, R. E. Message framing and persuasion: a
message processing analysis. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 22, 257–268
(1996).
30. Shaw, E. F. Agenda-setting and mass communication theory.
Gazette25, 96–105 (1979).
31. Cheng, X., Yan, X., Lan, Y. & Guo, J. BTM: topic modeling over short
texts. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 26, 2928–2941 (2014).
32. Wang, J. et al. Global evidence of expressed sentiment alterations
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Nat. Hum. Behav. 6, 349–358 (2022).
33. Boon-Itt, S. & Skunkan, Y. Public perception of the COVID-19
pandemic on Twitter: sentiment analysis and topic modeling study.
JMIR Public Health Surveill. 6, e21978 (2020).
34. Coan, T. G., Boussalis, C., Cook, J. & Nanko, M. O. Computer-
assisted classiﬁcation of contrarian claims about climate change. Sci.
Rep. 11, 22320 (2021).
35. Rockström, J. et al. Planetary boundaries: exploring the safe
operating space for humanity. Ecol. Soc. 14, 32 (2009).
36. Schleussner, C.-F. et al. Science and policy characteristics of the Paris
Agreement temperature goal. Nat. Clim. Change 6, 827–835 (2016).
37. Schlosberg, D. & Collins, L. B. From environmental to climate justice:
climate change and the discourse of environmental justice. Wiley
Interdiscip. Rev. Clim. Change 5, 359–374 (2014).
38. Young, O. R. et al. Institutionalized governance processes: comparing
environmental problem solving in China and the United States. Glob.
Environ. Change 31, 163–173 (2015).
39. Zhang, H., Zhou, S. & Shen, B. Public trust: a comprehensive
investigation on perceived media credibility in China. Asian J.
Commun. 24, 158–172 (2014).
40. Li, L. Decoding political trust in China: a machine learning analysis.
China Q. 249, 1–20 (2022).
41. Dubois, E. & Gaffney, D. The multiple facets of inﬂuence: identifying
political inﬂuentials and opinion leaders on Twitter. Am. Behav. Sci.58,
1260–1277 (2014).
42. Flamino, J. et al. Political polarization of news media and inﬂuencers
on Twitter in the 2016 and 2020 US presidential elections. Nat. Hum.
Behav. 7, 904–916 (2023).
43. Hornsey, M. J. & Fielding, K. S. Understanding (and reducing) inaction
on climate change. Soc. Issues Policy Rev. 14, 3–35 (2020).
44. Trémolière, B. & Djeriouat, H. Exploring the roles of analytic cognitive
style, climate science literacy, illusion of knowledge, and political
orientation in climate change skepticism. J. Environ. Psychol. 74,
101561 (2021).
45. Conover, M. D., Gonçalves, B., Ratkiewicz, J., Flammini, A. &
Menczer, F. Predicting the Political Alignment of Twitter Users. In
Proc. 2011 IEEE Third International Conference on Privacy, Security,
Risk and Trust and 2011 IEEE Third International Conference on Social
Computing, 192–199 (IEEE, 2011).
46. Wang, B., Shen, Y. & Jin, Y. Measurement of public awareness of
climate change in China: based on a national survey with
4,025 samples. Chin. J. Popul. Resour. Environ. 15, 285–291 (2017).
47. Rajper, S. A., Ullah, S. & Li, Z. Exposure to air pollution and self-
reported effects on Chinese students: a case study of 13 megacities.
PLoS ONE 13, e0194364 (2018).
48. Lu, Y. et al. Characteristics of public concern on haze in China and its
relationship with air quality in urban areas. Sci. Total Environ. 637,
1597–1606 (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-025-02124-4
Article
Communications Earth & Environment |  (2025) 6:142 
9


49. Liu, J. C.-E. Low carbon plot: climate change skepticism with Chinese
characteristics. Environ. Sociol. 1, 280–292 (2015).
50. Weber, E. U. & Stern, P. C. Public understanding of climate change in
the United States. Am. Psychol.66, 315 (2011).
51. Kaiying, D., Senpeng, C. & Jingwei, D. On optimisation of web crawler
system on Scrapy framework. Int. J. Wirel. Mob. Comput. 18, 332–338
(2020).
52. Weaver, R. G. et al. COVID-19 leads to accelerated increases in
children’s BMI z-score gain: an interrupted time-series study. Am. J.
Prev. Med. 61, e161–e169 (2021).
53. Yan, X., Guo, J., Lan, Y. & Cheng, X. A biterm topic model for short
texts. In Proc. 22nd International Conference on World Wide Web.
1445–1456 (2013).
54. Cui,Y.,Che,W., Liu,T., Qin,B.& Yang,Z. Pre-trainingwithwhole word
masking for Chinese BERT. IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio Speech Lang.
Process. 29, 3504–3514 (2021).
55. Devika, R., Vairavasundaram, S., Mahenthar, C. S. J., Varadarajan, V.
& Kotecha, K. A deep learning model based on BERT and sentence
transformer for semantic keyphrase extraction on big social data.
IEEE Access 9, 165252–165261 (2021).
56. Cui, Y. et al. Revisiting pre-trained models for Chinese natural
language processing. In Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020. 657–668, Online.
(Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020).
57. Bastian, M., Heymann, S. & Jacomy, M. Gephi: An Open Source
Software for Exploring and Manipulating Networks. In Proc.
International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media. 361–362
(2009)
58. Shi, M. & Cao, H. In Proc. Cyber Security: 15th International Annual
Conference, CNCERT 2018. Revised Selected Papers 15, 153–164
(Springer, 2018).
Acknowledgements
The project was ﬁnancially supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 72234003, 72304136, 72222012, and
72488101).
Author contributions
Conceptualization, Y.J. and B.J.; Methodology, Y.J. and H.Y.; Data
collection and Investigation, Y.J., H.Y., and L.M.; Writing of Original Draft,
Y.J., H.Y., and L.Y.; Editing, Y.J., L.M., F.W., and M.Z.; Reviewing, L.Y., L.M.,
F.W., and M.Z.; Funding Acquisition, B.J., L.M., and Y.J.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-025-02124-4.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Miaomiao Liu, Yuan Li or Jun Bi.
Peer review information Communications Earth & Environment thanks
Ramit Debnath and the other anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to
the peer review of this work. Primary handling editors: Waqas Ejaz and
Carolina Ortiz Guerrero. A peer review ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and
reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed the licensed material. You
do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material
derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons
licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material
isnot includedin thearticle’s CreativeCommons licenceandyour intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use,
you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To
view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2025
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-025-02124-4
Article
Communications Earth & Environment |  (2025) 6:142 
10
