Science on YouTube: What users find when they search 
for climate science and climate manipulation  
 
Joachim Allgaier 
Institute of Science, Technology and 
Society Studies 
Alpen-Adria-Universität Klagenfurt 
Sterneckstraße 15 
9010 Klagenfurt, Austria 
Phone: +43/463/2700-6157 
E-Mail: joachim.allgaier@aau.at 
 
ABSTRACT 
Online video-sharing sites such as YouTube are very popular and 
also used by a lot of people to obtain knowledge and information, 
also on science, health and technology. Technically they could be 
valuable tools for the public communication of science and 
technology, but the users of YouTube are also confronted with 
conspiracy theories and erroneous and misleading information 
that deviates from scientific consensus views. This contribution 
details the results of a study that investigates what kind of 
information users find when they are searching for climate science 
and climate manipulation topics on YouTube and whether this 
information corresponds with or challenges scientific consensus 
views. An innovative methodological approach using the 
anonymization network Tor is introduced for drawing randomized 
samples of YouTube videos. This approach was used to select and 
examine a sample of 140 YouTube videos on climate topics. 
Keywords 
YouTube, Video, Science Communication, Tor, Climate, Climate 
Change, Climate Science, Climate Engineering, Geoengineering 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The online video-sharing website YouTube has been a 
phenomenal success and growing rapidly since its launch in 2005. 
YouTube today is one of the most popular internet sites and also 
the second most popular search engine used after Google in many 
countries [19]. According to the self-description of YouTube it 
has over a billion users, almost one-third of all people on the 
Internet [21]. The research presented in this contribution is 
particularly interested in the role of online video-sharing 
platforms, such as YouTube, for the public communication of 
science. Many citizens do use YouTube as a source of information 
about issues concerning science, technology and medicine [2]. 
Research has shown that high reading levels are required to 
comprehend 
web-based 
textual 
information 
on 
science, 
technology and medicine, and that might be a reason why many 
people prefer to use and watch YouTube videos in order to find 
information about scientific and other issues that interest them 
[6]. YouTube is particularly popular among young people, for 
instance a recent study in Germany found that 94 percent of 
youths between 12 and 19 years are on YouTube and that 81 
percent use it regularly [13]. Another study from Germany [9] 
found that more than two thirds (69 percent) of questioned young 
people between 14 and 29 years said they use YouTube (and other 
online video platforms) to get informed about science and 
research. Among those between 30 and 39 years more than half 
(55 percent) said the same, and among those between 40 and 49 
years it is still almost half (46 percent) who get informed via 
YouTube. When YouTube is so influential and so many people 
are using YouTube to get informed about science, technology and 
medicine, the big question is what kind of information do they 
find there and how the quality of information of YouTube is. The 
video format has a great potential for disseminating knowledge, it 
allows using visual and audio channels in isolation or combined 
for transmitting text, images, animations, films, subtitles, multiple 
languages and many other innovative and creative means of 
communication. Technically it could be a powerful tool for 
education and science, technology and health communication. 
However, various studies, mainly from the area of health 
communication have shown, that the quality of information on 
YouTube about biomedical topics strongly varies and that it is 
often strongly biased and, from a biomedical or scientific point of 
view, often inaccurate or erroneous [1]. For instance, one recent 
study compared information about a reported link between MMR 
vaccination and the development of autism in children, for which 
there is no scientific evidence, on YouTube, Google, Wikipedia 
and the scientific database PubMed [18]. The study authors found 
that from a biomedical point of view the lowest quality of 
information was found on YouTube and that the incorrect 
information also stayed there without being corrected for the 
longest time. YouTube is also notorious as a sort of Eldorado for 
conspiracy theories and other highly controversial content, for 
instance about the Ebola Virus disease [4]. One reason for this is 
that YouTube is a social media site without any quality or 
editorial control; virtually everybody can open an account and 
upload content on this platform [17]. Another reason is that video 
formats have become extremely popular and rapid technological 
advances and mobile technologies allow more and more people 
not just to watch videos, but also to produce them themselves. 
(Science) communication and webscience research has just begun 
to study YouTube and other online video-sharing websites 
empirically and there is still a massive gap in the research 
literature on what kind of content users find there, how they find 
it there, who uploads content with what kinds of intentions and 
how different groups of people perceive and make sense of the 
content they find on online video-sharing websites, such as 
YouTube. This contribution wants to address this gap by 
presenting results from a study about science content on 
YouTube. A novel methodological approach will be introduced 
involving the anonymity network Tor, which has been applied to 
find out more about what kind of information concerning climate 


change, climate science and climate manipulation can be found on 
YouTube, which are topics that are highly controversial in the 
eyes of many people. The central aim of this research is to find 
out if this information found on YouTube corresponds with 
mainstream scientific positions or if it challenges scientific 
consensus views. 
2. METHOD 
Studying YouTube empirically is still challenging. There are 
many elements that could be studied, for instance the genre of 
videos, the user statistics, the recommender system of YouTube, 
or the comments from other users [11]. In health communication 
research it has become something like a convention to take, for 
instance, the 100 videos that have received most views and that 
appear after entering a particular search term or search string and 
to analyze these videos for their medical accuracy [5]. This 
approach, however, is not going to provide answers to the 
question what people will find, if they use YouTube as a search 
engine, but only to the question what the quality of videos is that 
have been viewed most often, no matter how users found them 
(e.g. through recommendations on websites, links on twitter, 
email recommendation from friends etc.). Sampling online content 
via search engines is difficult, since personalized searches and the 
filter bubble or echo chamber [15] problem will most likely 
distort the results and lead to various biases [8]. An innovative 
methodological approach presented in this contribution is to use 
the 
anonymity 
network 
Tor 
(The 
Onion 
Router, 
https://www.torproject.org/, 02/02/2016) in order to alleviate 
potential biases that are created by single personalized searches. 
The free software and open network Tor directs Internet traffic 
through a free, worldwide, volunteer network of thousands of 
relays. Location, destination and IP address are encrypted 
multiple times in this process through randomly selected Tor 
relays and only the final relay decrypts the innermost layer of 
encryption and sends the original data to its destination without 
revealing the source IP address [20]. In the research presented 
here the Tor software has been installed and used to search for 
various keywords on YouTube relating to climate science, climate 
change, and climate manipulation. Each search has been repeated 
three times using default search settings in English, each time 
with a new identity provided by the Tor anonymity network. This 
procedure has been applied in order to obtain a randomized 
sample and to circumvent the filter bubble problem. All search 
results have been recorded. If more than eighty percent of the 
results in the third search were the same as in the first and second 
search (which was the case in all searches conducted), the results 
of the third search from YouTube for a particular search term 
were taken as the basis for the analysis of the first twenty videos 
that YouTube provided on the result page. This research strategy 
was adopted in order to have an approximation on what an 
average internet user will find if she or he searches for a particular 
term on YouTube. The first twenty results encompass all the 
results that a YouTube search provides for a particular search term 
on its first result page. These twenty videos have been selected 
and analyzed because they are most likely to be viewed by the 
users. Seven search terms were used to find videos on YouTube. 
These were 1. Climate, 2. Climate Change, 3. Climate Science, 4. 
Climate Engineering, 5. Geoengineering, 6. Climate Hacking, 7. 
Chemtrails. The last two terms are not scientific terms, but terms 
that are often used by opponents of mainstream science. They 
have been included in the sample to find out whether these 
searches lead to fundamentally different results than the previous 
terms and whether they support or challenge mainstream science. 
The first twenty videos have then been selected for each search, so 
that the sample of this study consists of 140 videos, twenty videos 
for each search term. The searches have been carried out between 
January 31, 2015 and June 25, 2015. Each video has been viewed 
at least once and a little summary of each video has been written 
down and archived, together with all textual information that 
YouTube provides for each video. The summary of each video has 
then been categorized in three different categories of videos: 1.) 
Videos supporting mainstream science and the scientific 
consensus view on human induced climate change as detailed by 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC); 2.) 
Discussion and debate formats where mainstream science is 
discussed with opponents; 3.) Videos showing denial of scientific 
mainstream positions, such as denial of human-induced climate 
change or straightforward conspiracy theories about science and 
technology. 
3. RESULTS 
140 videos have been analyzed and categorized in three different 
categories. The oldest video in the sample was uploaded on 
September 22, 2008 and is titled: “Basics of Geography: 
Climate”, which has received 274,071 view until January 31, 
2015. This video can be classified as a science education video, 
which clearly supports a scientific mainstream position. The most 
recent video included in the sample was uploaded on June 17, 
2015 and is titled: “Rush: Pope’s stance on Climate Science 
proves He’s a Marxist”. This video is critical to the scientific 
consensus on human-induced climate change and has been viewed 
13,569 until June 25, 2015. The videos included in the sample 
encompass different types of styles and genres, but most of them 
are either snippets or excerpts from previously broadcast TV 
programs or self-made videos. A few of the videos of the sample 
are also public talks and academic presentations. Table 1 shows 
the distribution of the videos over the three categories that have 
been created to categorize the videos along their stance towards 
mainstream scientific positions. 
 
Table 1. Distribution of the Videos of the Sample (n = 140) 
Search Term 
 Scientific 
Consensus 
Debate 
Conspiracy 
or Climate 
Change 
Denial 
Sum 
Climate 
18 
2 
20 
Climate 
Change 
18 
1 
1 
20 
Climate Science 
17 
1 
2 
20 
Climate 
Engineering 
8 
 
12 
20 
Geoengineering 
2 
18 
20 
Climate 
Hacking 
6 
1 
13 
20 
Chemtrails 
1 
19 
20 
Sum 
70 
3 
67 
140 
 


For the first three search terms Climate, Climate Change and 
Climate Science, the absolute majority of videos in the sample 
adhere to the scientific consensus view. Most of them are parts 
from news programs or documentaries that underline the serious 
consequences of man-made climate change, and many of the clips 
feature quotes or comments from eminent climate scientists. Many 
of these videos could be very helpful tools and very valuable 
contributions for science education and public communication 
and discussion of issues such as climate change. Very few videos 
(5 of 60) challenge mainstream scientific positions, and even less 
videos (2 of 60) are discussion formats in which climate scientists 
discuss climate change with climate change deniers. However, the 
picture changes entirely if we focus on the videos that appear as 
results in the search for Climate Engineering, Geoengineering, 
Climate Hacking and Chemtrails. Here more than half of the 
videos (62 of 80) oppose scientific consensus views or promulgate 
straightforward non-scientific conspiracy theories. Here we 
mostly find self-made and amateur videos of protagonists that 
believe in the so-called chemtrail conspiracy theory, which claims 
that evil forces spray the population with toxic substances from 
airplanes, but also a range of videos from people who deny man-
made climate change for various reasons. In the chemtrail case the 
same protagonists appear over and over again in many of the 
videos. The name of the conspiracy is derived from the 
condensation trails of airplanes in the sky, which conspiracy 
theorists take as evidence for clandestine government or science 
operations against the population and they call them chemtrails. 
Researcher Rose Cairns from the University of Sussex studied the 
chemtrail movement and classifies its worldview as that of a 
world conspiracy theory that includes the belief in a powerful, evil 
and clandestine group that aspires to global hegemony [7], a 
position that is clearly far off scientific mainstream positions. 
Here the results for the search term Geoengineering are 
particularly striking in this this context: 90 percent of the search 
results adhere to the chemtrail conspiracy theory. However, both 
the terms Climate Engineering and Geoengineering stem from 
scientists and scientific discussion about how to deal with or 
mitigate the consequences of anthropogenic climate change with 
technical means (without any reference to the so-called 
chemtrails) [16]. Compared to other scientific fields it is a rather 
young epistemic community that seriously considers using 
technoscientific means to deal with the consequences of climate 
change [14]. The search term Climate Hacking addresses various 
issues, it is a non-scientific term for climate manipulations but 
also refers to hacked emails from climate scientists, that climate 
change deniers (unsuccessfully) used as evidence against human-
induced climate change. Most of the videos that show up as 
results here are clearly challenging mainstream scientific 
positions. Another interesting result is that 95 percent of the 
videos that came up as results for the search term chemtrails came 
from users who believe in the chemtrail conspiracy and there are 
virtually no attempts to challenge the conspiracy theory in any 
way in the sample. In sum, it seems fair to say that the specific 
search term users make use of in YouTube searches matters and 
will determine to what degree they will be exposed to mainstream 
scientific positions or not.    
4. DISCUSSION  
The results of this research show that in the case of climate 
science and climate manipulation rather general search terms such 
as Climate, Climate Change, or Climate Science are likely to bring 
up videos as results that confront the users in their majority with 
mainstream scientific positions on human-induced climate 
change. These results indicate that YouTube could be a very 
valuable tool for informing citizens about science for some key 
issues. However, more specific search terms, such as Climate 
Engineering, Geoengineering, Climate Hacking, or Chemtrails 
largely led to videos that confront the users with positions that 
challenge mainstream scientific positions on climate change, or to 
outspoken conspiracy theories about science and technology – an 
issue which poses a major challenge to the public communication 
of science and technology. The later is particularly the case if 
users search for Geoengineering on YouTube. The chemtrail 
conspiracy theorists very successfully occupied this term and re-
labeled their conspiracy worldview using a relatively new 
scientific term, making their concern sound more scientific and 
possibly more reasonable. This strategy also has the advantage 
that chemtrailers can now jump on the bandwagon when there are 
actual scientific discussions and events addressing technical 
options of climate manipulation. In fact chemtrailers explicitly 
address their followers to use the more scientific terms, in order 
not to be immediately identified as conspiracy theorists [7], as on 
one of their websites [10]: “The geoengineering term is related to 
hard science, the "chemtrails" term has no such verifiable basis 
but rather leads anyone that Googles the term straight to 
"conspiracy theory" and "hoax" definitions. Use the terms 
"climate engineering" and "geoengineering".” Social media 
websites and video platforms without editorial control, such as 
YouTube, provide a very fertile ground for conspiracy theorists 
and opponents of mainstream science because there are no 
gatekeepers and hence no quality control is taking place on this 
channels. It has been shown previously that other groups that 
oppose mainstream science – such as creationist groups that 
oppose the theory of evolution for religious reasons – call their 
followers to make use of YouTube as an effective tool for 
“internet evangelism” [3]. In this context it should also be 
mentioned that videos from chemtrailers, creationists and other 
opponents of mainstream science are often “mirrored” by their 
followers, this means that whole videos or parts thereof are also 
uploaded by various followers and friends, often under various 
names and with different tags and keywords, so that it is virtually 
impossible to dam up or delete the content once it has been 
uploaded. This practice is also applied in order to distort search 
results in favour of their own content. One striking result of this 
research is that no videos have been found in the sample that 
counter the chemtrail conspiracy theory. The part of the scientific 
community that seriously engages with work on climate 
engineering or geoengineering is so far only very marginally 
present on YouTube and so far it seem that the discourse on the 
two terms on YouTube is dominated by chemtrail conspiracy 
theorists. In contrast it seems that so far the mainstream scientific 
establishment was more successful to dominate the discourse on 
man-made climate change. However, these results come with 
caveats. The research strategy adopted here only allows for a 
snapshot picture on what is happening on YouTube given these 
terms. YouTube is a particularly lively website with heavy 
internet traffic that is constantly in flux and possible results may 
change very quickly. However, it still seems that YouTube and 
other online video-sharing websites have an enormous potential as 
tool for science, technology and health education and 
communication and the professional communities from these 
areas will do well to engage with these communication channels. 
The results of this research show that people and groups who 
oppose mainstream scientific positions already gained a strong 
foothold on such channels and know very well how to use them to 


their advantage. More research on how such groups use YouTube 
and other social media sites is urgently needed in order to counter 
them successfully [12]. In addition, still very little is known on 
what kind of scientific content can be found on YouTube and 
other online-sharing websites, who produces and uploads it, and 
how various users makes sense of it and perceive various types of 
content on video websites. So far it has been very difficult to 
obtain randomized samples of YouTube and other social media 
content and one possible solution advocated in this contribution 
that could easily be transferred to further research is to use the 
free software and open network Tor for sampling purposes. 
Further research is also needed on how various other potentially 
controversial scientific subjects are depicted on YouTube and 
other video-sharing websites, such as the, for instance, the theory 
of evolution or information about vaccination. The academic 
examination of YouTube and online video-sharing in general has 
just begun. A solid methodological repertoire to study practices 
and consequences of online video-sharing empirically is urgently 
required and conceptual and theoretical work needs to draw on 
various disciplines and interdisciplinary exchange in order to 
illuminate this interesting and influential social phenomenon. 
5. REFERENCES 
 
[1] Allgaier, J. Science and Medicine on YouTube. In 
preparation, February 2016. 
[2] Allgaier, J. YouTube Science: Wo Wissenschaft auf 
Populärkultur trifft. In preparation, January 2016. 
[3] Allgaier, J. (2013): On the Shoulders of YouTube: Science in 
Music Videos. Science Communication, 35, 2, 267-276. 
DOI: 10.1177/1075547012454949 
[4] Allgaier, J. and Svalastog, A.L. 2015. The communication 
aspects of the Ebola virus disease outbreak in Western Africa 
- do we need to counter one, two, or many epidemics? 
Croatian Medical Journal, 56, 5, 496-499. DOI: 
10.3325/cmj.2015.56.496 
[5] Basch, C.H.; Basch, C.E., Ruggles, K.V. and Hammond, R. 
2015. Coverage of the Ebola Virus Disease Epidemic on 
YouTube. Disaster Medicine and Public Health 
Preparedness, 9, 5, 531-535. doi: 10.1017/dmp.2015.77 
[6] Berland G.K., Elliott M.N., Morales L.S., et al. 2001. Health 
Information on the Internet: Accessibility, Quality, and 
Readability in English and Spanish. JAMA, 285, 2612-2621. 
[7] Cairns, R. 2014. Climates of suspicion: ‘chemtrail’ 
conspiracy narratives and the international politics of 
geoengineering. The Geographical Journal, Nov 25, 2014.     
DOI: 10.1111/geoj.12116      
 
 
 
           
[8] Emmer, M. and Strippel, C. 2015. Stichprobenziehung für 
Online-Inhaltsanalysen: Suchmaschinen und Filter Bubbles, 
in Digitale Methoden in der Kommunikationswissenschaft, 
A. Maireder et al,. eds. Digital Communication Research, 
Berlin. 
[9] Forum Wissenschaftskommunikation 2015. 
Wissenschaftsbarometer 2015: Eine repräsentative 
Meinungsumfrage. Berlin. Available at 
http://www.wissenschaft-im-
dialog.de/projekte/wissenschaftsbarometer/ 
[10] GeoEngieering Watch 2015. Approaching People on the 
topic of Geoengineering. Available at 
http://www.geoengineeringwatch.org/how-to-get-involved/ 
[11] Kavoori, A. 2011. Reading YouTube: The Critical Viewer’s 
Guide. Peter Lang, New York. 
[12] Leshner, A.I. 2012. Capably Communicating Science. 
Science, 337, 777. 
[13] Medienpädagogischer Forschungsverbund Südwest 2015: 
JIM 2015 Jugend, Information, (Multi-)Media Basisstudie 
zum Medienumgang 12- bis 19-Jähriger in Deutschland. 
Landesanstalt für Kommunikation Baden-Württemberg 
(LFK), Stuttgart. Available at 
http://www.mpfs.de/fileadmin/JIM-pdf15/JIM_2015.pdf 
[14] Matzner, N. 2016. Emerging Epistemic Communities in 
Climate Engineering Science and Policy. In preparation, 
February 2016. 
[15] Pariser, E. 2011. The Filter Bubble: What the Internet Is 
Hiding from You. Penguin Press, New York. 
[16] Royal Society 2009. Geoengineering the climate: science, 
governance and uncertainty. London. Available at 
http://royalsociety.org/policy/publications/2009/geoengineeri
ng-climate/. 
[17] Soukup, P.A. 2014. Looking at, with, and through YouTube. 
Communication Research Trends, 33,3, 3-34. 
[18] Venkatramana, A.; Gargb, N.; Kumarca, N. 2015. Greater 
freedom of speech on Web 2.0 correlates with dominance of 
views linking vaccines to autism. Vaccine, 33, 12, 1422-
1425. 
[19] Welbourne, D.J. and Grant, W.J. 2015. Science 
communication on YouTube: Factors that affect channel and 
video popularity. Public Understanding of Science. DOI: 
10.1177/0963662515572068 
[20] Wikipedia 2016. Tor (anonymity network). Available at: 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tor_(anonymity_network) 
[21] YouTube 2016. Statistics. Available at 
https://www.youtube.com/yt/press/ 
 
 
 
 
