Volume 10 | 
The geopolitics of ‘platforms’: the TikTok 
challenge 
Joanne E. Gray Queensland University of Technology joanne.e.gray@qut.edu.au 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.14763/2021.2.1557 
Published: 11 May 2021 
Received: 6 October 2020 Accepted: 9 April 2021 
Competing Interests: The author has declared that no competing interests exist that 
have influenced the text. 
Licence: This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution 3.0 License (Germany) which permits unrestricted use, 
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly 
cited. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/de/deed.en 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 
Citation: Gray, J.E. (2021). The geopolitics of ‘platforms’: the TikTok challenge. Internet 
Policy Review, 10(2). https://doi.org/10.14763/2021.2.1557 
Keywords: TikTok, Platforms, Competition, China, Geopolitics 
Abstract: In the international digital platform market, a handful of US companies enjoy immense 
cultural, economic and political power. The short form video platform TikTok provides significant 
competition to these US incumbents but so far policymakers have focused on the geopolitical 
implications of TikTok. This paper provides a content analysis of government and company sources, 
issued between April and August 2020, to systematically establish the geopolitics of the TikTok 
controversy. It is important to identify geopolitical motivations because they can obscure other 
factors relevant to platform politics, such as the value of competition in a highly concentrated 
international platform market. The paper concludes by outlining a research agenda for enhancing 
competition and avoiding the solidification of conventional geopolitical power dynamics in the 
international digital platform market. 
Issue 2 
 


Introduction 
The short form video app TikTok is the first social media ‘platform’ born outside 
the US to significantly rival the Silicon Valley incumbents. Since its rise in the 
short video economy, TikTok has come under intense criticism from governments 
around the world, resulting in outright bans in some jurisdictions (Press Informa­
tion Bureau Delhi, 2020). Lawmakers have questioned whether ByteDance, the 
company that owns TikTok, sufficiently protects user data against access by the 
Chinese state. Yet, TikTok’s data practices are not dissimilar to those of its US 
counterparts (Fowler, 2020) and the controversy over TikTok’s rise in the US cannot 
be explained by an analysis of the company’s technology, policies or practices 
alone. This article provides a geopolitical analysis of the political and economic 
contestations over TikTok that played out at the national level between the US and 
China from April to August 2020. 
Applying a geopolitical lens to the political rhetoric and actions relating to TikTok 
improves understanding of the core issues that have animated this platform con­
troversy. For at least two decades now, the US has dominated in the international 
digital platform market. This dominance falls within a broader geopolitical system 
of US hegemony that has defined the liberal world order since the end of the Cold 
War. Through strategic partnerships and alliances with nations around the world 
the US has enjoyed great economic and political power. China’s economic growth 
destabilises a world order that centres upon US hegemony. What the TikTok con­
troversy shows is the extent to which this geopolitical setting is affecting the poli­
tics of platforms today. It is important to identify and isolate pertinent geopolitical 
motivations because they can work to obscure other factors relevant to platform 
politics, such as the value of competition in a highly concentrated international 
platform market. 
In most sectors, market concentration is problematic but it is particularly so in an 
information economy. Digital platforms are information gatekeepers, with the ca­
pacity to influence social conditions by determining the ideas and information that 
are shared and amplified across vast socio-technical systems. In the international 
platform market, a handful of US companies enjoy immense cultural, economic 
and political power derived from their ownership and control over platform infra­
structure and data. TikTok has provided competition to these US companies and 
the global success of TikTok confirms that users will adopt innovative new plat­
forms when they are made available to them, regardless of their geographic ori­
gins. If consumers are not locked in to the incumbents, there is potential for in­
creased competition to lead to a dilution of concentrated power in the internation­
2
Internet Policy Review 10(2) | 2021


al platform market. But this requires overcoming conventional geopolitical agen­
das and eschewing both US and Chinese hegemony. 
1. Platforms and geopolitics: adventures in US 
hegemony 
The dominance of the digital environment by Silicon Valley technology companies 
presents a range of social, political and economic problems, many of which are 
compounded by their oligopolistic status. It is undemocratic and anticompetitive 
to have a small number of companies own and control the systems by which we 
communicate, socialise and transact (Gray, 2020). The incumbent US platforms, in­
cluding Facebook, Instagram, YouTube and Twitter, are also dysfunctional in their 
democratic role. To varying degrees, they spread and amplify misinformation and 
hate speech (Donzelli et al., 2018; Matamoros-Fernández, 2017), they generate 
and exploit data at the expense of user privacy (Burdon, 2020; Kitchin & Lauriault, 
2014), they embed unfair and harmful biases into their algorithms and technical 
infrastructure (Maayan & Elkin-Koren, 2016; Pasquale, 2015), they fail to ensure 
the security of user data (Mann & Daly, 2020), and they offer limited mechanisms 
for transparency and accountability (Suzor et al., 2019). Two decades into the new 
millennium, the politics of ‘platforms’ (Gillespie, 2010) is a highly wrought so­
ciopolitical affair. 
Lawmakers around the world are increasingly taking action to curtail the reach 
and influence of the dominant US platforms. From the European Union’s General 
Data Protection Regulation (Lynskey, 2017), to the Australian Competition and Con­
sumer Commission’s investigation of the impact of Facebook and Google on com­
petition in media and advertising (Australian Competition & Consumer Commis­
sion, 2017), to the 2020 US congressional hearings where the heads of Google, Ap­
ple, Amazon and Facebook were questioned over the potential use of their market 
power to stifle competition (Romm, 2020), these lawmakers are questioning 
whether the activities of the dominant US platforms are legal, legitimate or fair. 
Given this backdrop, the open hostility evident at the level of international politics 
towards TikTok, a competitor to the incumbent US platforms, might appear illogi­
cal. Properly understanding the logic that underpins the political actions and 
rhetoric over TikTok requires that they be placed within a geopolitical context. 
To systematically establish the geopolitics of the TikTok controversy, this study in­
volves a qualitative content analysis of US and Chinese government documents is­
sued between April and August 2020 (a period in which the Trump administration 
actively pursued the regulation of TikTok), as well as relevant corporate sources. 
3
Gray


Using keyword searches of government websites and databases, 27 documents 
were collected in which statements were made about TikTok by US and Chinese 
state officials. US sources included documents published by whitehouse.gov, 
specifically, transcripts of three White House briefings statements made by the US 
Press Secretary, one briefing statement published by the National Security Council, 
transcripts of eight briefing statements by President Trump, three Executive Orders 
by President Trump along with three related letters to the Speaker of the House 
and President of the Senate, and a press statement by the US Department of State 
authored by Mike Pompeo. Statements made by Mike Pompeo in an interview with 
Fox News were also reviewed. Chinese sources included eight English language 
transcripts of press conferences published by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the 
People’s Republic of China: three held by Spokesperson Zhao Lijian and five by 
Spokesperson Wang Wenbin. Together, these sources contain the political positions 
and responses of US and Chinese state actors during a period in which the Trump 
administration was actively pursuing the regulation of TikTok and, notably, they 
present highly consistent positions on TikTok for both states. Corporate documents 
included fourteen official statements released by TikTok executives and one offi­
cial statement by Microsoft Inc. 
In accordance with a classical geopolitical approach, these sources are used to es­
tablish an objective account of a specific geopolitical context. Classical geopolitics, 
unlike critical geopolitics (Toal et al., 1998), is characterised by the modernist epis­
temological and ontological assumption that a common geopolitical reality can be 
observed through ‘historical example, logic, common sense, visualisation, statisti­
cal analysis and rational choice’ (Kelly, 2006, p. 16). A limitation of this approach is 
that it requires that we accept that there is an objective geopolitical context to be 
established in the first place. Conducting a critical geopolitical analysis of the Tik­
Tok controversy, including an examination of how geopolitical knowledge is repro­
duced and reinforced in this controversy, is a topic worthy of future study and the 
research provided in this paper should be helpful in that pursuit. However, for the 
purposes of this research, which is to understand the impact of the geopolitical 
contest between China and the US on platform politics, a classical geopolitical ap­
proach is effective. Through a classical geopolitical analysis we can improve our 
understanding of how state territoriality and changes in the global distribution of 
economic and military power are playing out in the digital environment. 
The classical model of geopolitics suggests the actions and policies of a state are 
influenced by that state’s geographical conditions (Lee, 2018). A state will have 
largely stable geographical conditions (Flint, 2016)—including its location, posi­
4
Internet Policy Review 10(2) | 2021


tion in a region, resources, topography, climate, size and shape (Kelly, 2006)—and 
these conditions will influence how the state approaches international affairs. 
Geopolitical theorists recognise that historically US foreign policy has been influ­
enced by its geographical isolation from other economic and military powers (Kel­
ly, 2006). Unlike many European nations, for example, the US is geographically iso­
lated, and US leaders have sought to use this position of relative isolation as insu­
lation from national security threats. In broad terms, the US has managed its 
strategic interests through ‘offshore balancing’ (Layne, 1997). By aligning with cer­
tain ‘offshore’ nations, the US takes action to influence the global distribution of 
power, all while sustaining a position of isolation from the threat of military incur­
sion at home. As Kelly explains, the US has had 
a rather permanent security strategy of maintaining a favorable balance of 
power within the rimlands of the Eurasian continent, enabled by its marine 
strength and by bases in certain pivotal areas (Western Europe, Persian Gulf, 
and Korea/Japan). Its allies and opponents might vary from time to time; yet, 
North America will continue unrelentingly towards this secure rimlands position 
framed within its advantages of great distances and isolation from likely foes, 
no matter what other global and regional transformations may appear (Kelly, 
2006, p. 16). 
Regardless of swings in specific foreign policy approaches—from ‘US First’ to US as 
primus inter pares to US exceptionalism and anti-imperialism (O’loughlin, 1999)—a 
notion of protection through geographical isolation has long informed the US ap­
proach to its international affairs. For the US, the merits of this approach are evi­
denced by the global hegemony it has enjoyed. Through strategic alliances and 
partnerships that have offset military threats and advanced the US economy, for 
several decades, the US has sustained a position of global economic and military 
dominance (Alcaro, 2018). 
The rise of China in the global world order represents a threat to US hegemony 
(Alcaro, 2018). This is, of course, a simplification of a complex relationship that al­
so features ‘pathological codependency’ due in significant part to enduring macro­
economic imbalances resulting from China's foreign exchange reserves of US cur­
rency (Roach, 2014). Nevertheless, the relationship between the US and China is 
evolving and China’s growth can be viewed as destabilising to longstanding US 
geopolitical strategy. In geopolitics, military and economic capacity are key indices 
of power (Flint, 2016). But geopolitical power is also relational; military and eco­
nomic capacities “only have an effect when two actors form a power relation” 
5
Gray


(Flint, 2016, p.16), whether that be a relationship of alliance or competition. In re­
cent years, China has greatly improved its economic and military capacities result­
ing in increasingly competitive power relations between the US and China (Xue­
tong, 2020). While geopolitical relations between the two nations are complex, 
China’s continuing accumulation of power challenges a world order that is shaped 
to best serve US interests. 
The TikTok controversy falls within an intensifying contest between the US and 
China over the strategic value of the digital environment (Cartwright, 2020). The 
geopolitics of the digital environment, and of platforms more specifically, involves 
contestation over who gets to extract economic value from the platform economy 
(Cartwright, 2020); who gets to set laws and norms for and exert ideological influ­
ence through vast sociotechnical systems (DeNardis & Hackl, 2015; Tusikov, 2019); 
and who enjoys the strategic political power derived from control over or access to 
digital data and infrastructure (Mann & Warren, 2018). Up to this point, this realm 
of geopolitics has largely mirrored that of the physical environment—the US has 
dominated economically and culturally across large regions of the digital environ­
ment (Gray, 2020). Recently, however, Chinese technology firms have flourished 
(Hong, 2017), expanding China’s economic and strategic capacities and sparking 
competitive tensions with the US (Cartwright, 2020). As the economic value of the 
digital environment continues to grow, we can expect to see more contests be­
tween nations seeking to extract value and exert influence in the digital environ­
ment; and identifying the geopolitical underpinnings of ensuing platform contro­
versies is important for an effective evaluation of the related legal or public policy 
interventions. As Sickler explains, viewing “the world in which we live from a 
geopolitical and geostrategic perspective is important...because it can help make 
clear what the real stakes are in such issues and thus enable the public to assess 
the choices taken by the government in its name” (Sicker, 2010, pp. 17–18). By 
placing the recent contestation over TikTok within its geopolitical context, we im­
prove understanding of key political motivations driving this platform controversy 
and the resulting policy responses. 
2. The geopolitics of TikTok’s controversial rise in the 
US 
In the short form video market, while apps such as Marco Polo and House Party 
have provided alternatives to market leaders Instagram, Snapchat and Facebook, 
only TikTok has managed to achieve a level of adoption high enough to pose an 
actual competitive threat to the market incumbents. TikTok rose to prominence in 
6
Internet Policy Review 10(2) | 2021


2019 and, by early 2020, it was the most downloaded app globally (Williams, 
2020), surpassing 2 billion downloads in the Google Play and App Store combined 
(Moshin, 2020). In 2021, TikTok is estimated to have over 700 million active 
monthly users worldwide (Datareportal, 2021). 
TikTok is the product of technology developer ByteDance Ltd, a company born in 
China but incorporated in the Cayman Islands and notable for not being part of the 
three tech giants in China—Baidu, Alibaba and Tencent. In 2016, ByteDance 
brought its short video platform to the Chinese market as Douyin. A year later, the 
company acquired Musical.ly—a lip synching platform, also created in China, which 
had some limited success among teenagers in the US (Spangler, 2016). In 2018, 
ByteDance integrated Musical.ly with Douyin technology to produce TikTok, a 
product designed specifically for a global audience (Jia & Ruan, 2020). TikTok 
hosts audiovisual works between 15-60 seconds, algorithmically curated for audi­
ences, with features designed to instigate user generated content and virality 
(Kaye et al., in press). 
TikTok’s success is due in significant part to its innovative recommendation system 
(Chan, 2018). TikTok’s machine learning-enabled recommendation system does not 
require users to follow creators or to explicitly opt-in to certain types of content. 
Instead, the platform decides what to serve its users as they swipe through a nev­
er-ending stream of short videos (TikTok Newsroom, 2020a). To determine which 
videos it serves each user, TikTok reportedly uses three key algorithms: a recom­
mendation algorithm, a content classification algorithm, and a user profiling algo­
rithm (C. Wang, 2020). The recommendation algorithm reportedly uses real-time 
training and learns from features such as correlation between content and user in­
formation, user behaviour and trends (C. Wang, 2020). TikTok also provides all 
videos that pass an initial screening process exposure to at least 200 users, giving 
a wide range of content creators an opportunity for virality, but also providing Tik­
Tok with vast troves of user and video data that it can feed into its algorithms. 
With TikTok, Bytedance has successfully harnessed machine learning systems to 
provide an innovative short video platform experience. 
Despite its large and enthusiastic global user base, TikTok has been the subject of 
intense criticism and speculation about the ethics of the platform, its objectives 
and its sociocultural implications. The platform has been accused of excessive data 
extraction and analysis practices, including unnecessarily copying data from users’ 
phones (Al-Heeti, 2020) and collecting information that may be used to identify 
and track the location of users (Misty Hong v Bytedance Inc, 2019). TikTok has also 
been subject to claims that it hosts harmful content; for example, in July 2020, the 
7
Gray


BBC reported that extremist libertarian groups in the US had a substantial pres­
ence on the platform (Clayton, 2020). At the same time, others argue TikTok unfair­
ly exploits user content and copyrighted works without sufficient economic return 
for creators and intellectual property owners (Alexander, 2020). Yet, most of the is­
sues at the heart of these criticisms are not unique to TikTok or new to the short 
form video economy. They are reflective of the well established politics of plat­
forms, which feature controversies over data security and user privacy (Isaak & 
Hanna, 2018), content moderation (Gillespie, 2018), and the regulation of speech 
(Balkin, 2017). YouTube, Facebook, Google, Twitter, Instagram and other US plat­
forms have been subject to criticisms and controversies similar to those surround­
ing TikTok (Suzor, 2019). What the TikTok controversy reveals is the extent to 
which the politics of platforms is immersed in geopolitical tensions between the 
US and China. 
The geopolitical tensions underpinning the TikTok controversy are reflected most 
strongly in the debates over TikTok’s national security implications. On 24 June 
2020, national security advisor to the US government, Robert O’Brien, spoke at the 
Arizona Commerce Authority on the topic of the Chinese government’s “ideological 
and global ambitions” (O’Brien, 2020). In his speech, O’Brien warned that China 
posed a threat to US citizens and he directly implicated TikTok in his critique: 
On TikTok, a Chinese-owned social media platform with over 40 million 
American users—probably a lot of your kids and younger colleagues–accounts 
criticizing CCP policies are routinely removed or deleted…When the Chinese 
Communist Party cannot buy your data, it steals it…How will the Chinese 
Communist Party use this data? In the same way it uses data within China’s 
borders: to target, to flatter, to cajole, to influence, to coerce, and to even 
blackmail individuals to say and do things that serve the Party’s interests 
(O’Brien, 2020, para. 22). 
While the Chinese government has been known to influence the content available 
on Douyin, the evidence of similar influence on TikTok is limited. For example, a 
2020 comparative study of the two Bytedance short form video apps found the 
Chinese government used Douyin to promote Chinese patriotism but there was no 
corresponding evidence on TikTok (Chen et al., 2020). When Bytedance first began 
releasing TikTok into markets outside of China in 2017, the platform’s content 
moderation guidelines were aimed at limiting the circulation of all highly contro­
versial materials on the platform. In some cases, this resulted in censorship of con­
tent unfavourable to the Chinese state, including videos relating to Tibetan inde­
8
Internet Policy Review 10(2) | 2021


pendence and the treatment of Uighurs in Xinjiang (Hern, 2019). But TikTok’s ap­
proach to content moderation has evolved (TikTok Newsroom, 2019), and a range 
of political activists are now prominent on the platform (Andrews, 2020). While 
TikTok is often praised for facilitating access to diverse creators and content (see, 
e.g., Yan, 2020) it also continues to be criticised for algorithmically suppressing 
political videos, such as those from Black Lives Matter activists (McCluskey, 2020). 
Currently, there is a lack of robust evidence for measuring and evaluating the ex­
tent to which TikTok’s algorithms meaningfully promote politically and socially di­
verse content, but what does seem clear from the available evidence (e.g., Chen et 
al, 2020; Zhang 2020) is that TikTok is not subject to Chinese state influence to the 
same extent as is Douyin. 
The lack of a robust evidence-base notwithstanding, in his speech, O’Brien was ex­
plicit about the ideological and security implications of TikTok, and its relationship 
to US geopolitical strategy: 
President Trump understands that lasting peace comes through strength … The 
Trump Administration will speak out and reveal what the Chinese Communist 
Party believes, and what it is planning—not just for China and Hong Kong and 
Taiwan, but for the world…Together with our allies and partners, we will resist 
the Chinese Communist Party’s efforts to manipulate our people and our 
governments, damage our economies, and undermine our sovereignty. (O’Brien, 
2020, para. 47). 
On 6 July 2020, US Secretary of State, Mike Pompeo, confirmed the Trump adminis­
tration was considering banning TikTok on national security grounds (Bella, 2020). 
Pompeo expressed that TikTok might pose a national security threat if Bytedance 
were compelled to provide information about US citizens to the Chinese govern­
ment and implied TikTok should be treated similar to Huawei, the Chinese 
telecommunications company that is effectively banned in the US (Keane, 2020). 
Evidently, it was the Trump administration’s position that TikTok is not simply a 
platform for connection and entertainment but a tool the Chinese state might 
wield for strategic security and ideological influence within the US. In other words, 
TikTok might be used to further empower China in geopolitical relations between 
the two states. 
TikTok’s data policies and practices provide no indication that the platform poses 
any singular national security threat and compared to other popular Chinese mo­
bile applications it has higher standards of user data privacy protections (Jia & Ru­
9
Gray


an, 2020). The company also has a formal policy to deal with requests for user in­
formation made by governments. TikTok’s policy provides that TikTok will honour 
requests for user information that are made through “proper channels and where 
otherwise required by law” or “in limited emergency situations...without legal 
process” to prevent deaths or serious injury (TikTok Safety Centre, 2020a, Compli­
ance with government requests section). TikTok’s law enforcement guidelines fur­
ther clarify that proper process includes providing “the appropriate legal docu­
ments required for the type of information being sought, such as a subpoena, court 
order, or warrant, or submit an emergency request” (TikTok Law Enforcement, 
2020, TikTok’s policy on responding to law enforcement requests section). Both 
Facebook and Google have similar policies for handling requests for user informa­
tion made by governments (Facebook, 2019; Google Inc., 2020). 
Since December 2019, TikTok has released to the public aggregated data on the 
requests for user information made to TikTok by governments from around the 
world (Ebenstein, 2019). According to 2019 and 2020 reports, TikTok has not re­
ceived any requests from the Chinese government and the majority of requests for 
user information received between 1 July 2019 and 31 December 2020 were made 
by India and the United States (TikTok Safety Centre, 2020b). It is beyond the scope 
of this research to determine whether TikTok’s reports are wholly accurate, howev­
er, they broadly follow the standards of reporting that Google and Facebook pro­
vide in their transparency reports (Facebook, 2019; Google Inc., 2020). It is also 
notable that a 2020 CIA assessment of TikTok reportedly concluded that while it 
was possible that the Chinese government could intercept TikTok data, there was 
no evidence to suggest that it had in fact done so (Sanger & Barnes, 2020). From 
the available evidence, it appears that the potential for the Chinese government to 
use TikTok data to threaten US national security remains theoretical. 
The national security concerns expressed by the US government—most specifically 
the concern that TikTok user data may be accessed by the Chinese government and 
used to track and gather information on US citizens and companies—raise an inter­
esting issue of territoriality. Over the past few years, Bytedance has extended its 
operations well beyond Chinese territorial spaces. While Bytedance Ltd was found­
ed in China, it is incorporated outside of China, in the Cayman Islands, and it oper­
ates as a multinational organisation, with subsidiaries in the US, Australia, Singa­
pore and the UK (Bytedance, 2020). TikTok operates from across the US, Europe 
and Asia with its largest US offices in Los Angeles, Mountain View and New York 
(Shead, 2020). In 2020, TikTok reportedly had almost 1,400 US employees (McGill, 
2020). To use TikTok for the surveillance of US citizens (a key concern stated by US 
10
Internet Policy Review 10(2) | 2021


officials) the Chinese state would either need to do so without TikTok’s permission 
(as it might seek to do with any company) or it would need to compel Chinese or 
US TikTok employees to provide access to its operations within the US. While nei­
ther course of action is inconceivable, and indeed TikTok’s multinational structure 
may make it more strategically useful to the Chinese state (Cartwright, 2020), the 
Chinese origins of TikTok can be used to overstate or oversimplify the platform’s 
actual territorial connection to China. 
Notably, when new national security laws were introduced in Hong Kong in 
2020—laws that may have subjected TikTok to China’s National Intelligence 
regime which require organisations to cooperate with Chinese intelligence agen­
cies—TikTok suspended the app’s operation there (Wang, 2020). In this case, TikTok 
took overt action to stay out of the jurisdictional reach of the Chinese government. 
Since its rise in the international digital platform market, TikTok has attempted to 
establish a reputation as a secure and transparent global corporate citizen. In April 
2020, in an update on TikTok’s security policies and practices, Roland Cloutier, Tik­
Tok’s Chief Security Officer, explained that the company had “engaged with the 
world's leading cyber security firms to accelerate our work advancing and validat­
ing our adherence to globally recognized security control standards” and contin­
ued to limit “the number of employees who have access to user data and the sce­
narios where data access is enabled” (Cloutier, 2020a, para. 15). Cloutier further 
explained his goal was to “minimize data access across regions so that, for exam­
ple, employees in the APAC region, including China, would have very minimal ac­
cess to user data from the EU and US” (Cloutier, 2020a, para. 7). In late June 2020, 
TikTok announced that it had established offices in Los Angeles and Washington, 
DC dedicated to giving “lawmakers and experts the opportunity to look under the 
hood of TikTok” (Cloutier, 2020b, para. 2). At these centres, the access TikTok pro­
vides includes access to the source code of its algorithms, a practice that stands 
TikTok apart from most other platforms in the US digital platform market. Former 
TikTok CEO, Kevin Mayer, explained TikTok’s desire to be a market leader in trans­
parency and encouraged other platforms to make similar disclosures (Mayer, 2020). 
In the midst of increasingly hostile rhetoric from the US government, TikTok has 
publicly given the appearance of working enthusiastically on its security, trans­
parency and accountability credentials. 
While openly rejecting the security claims made against it, TikTok has also sought 
to redirect political discourse towards competition in the digital platform market. 
In late July 2020, TikTok released a statement arguing that competition drives in­
novation and that it was “unfortunate for creators, brands, and the broader com­
11
Gray


munity that it has been years since a company came along and reimagined what a 
social entertainment platform could be” (Mayer, 2020, para. 1). TikTok’s then CEO, 
Kevin Mayer, also urged the US government to consider the benefits of “fair and 
open competition” and pointed to “maligning attacks by our competitor—namely 
Facebook—disguised as patriotism and designed to put an end to our very pres­
ence in the US” (Mayer, 2020, para. 7). As reported by the Wall Street Journal, in 
2019, Mark Zuckerberg, CEO of Facebook, conducted a series of meetings with US 
politicians, including US Senators and President Donald Trump, in which he argued 
TikTok posed a serious economic threat to the US (Wells et al., 2020). For TikTok 
executives, the controversy over its rise internationally is an issue of market com­
petition and TikTok considers its US counterparts to be seeking to leverage their 
relationship with US lawmakers (Birnhack & Elkin-Koren, 2003) to protect their 
dominance in a highly lucrative international digital platform market. 
TikTok has also tried to use the criticisms of its data practices to initiate a discus­
sion of the problems of transparency and accountability present in the internation­
al digital platform market at large. TikTok has suggested that rather than focusing 
narrowly on TikTok’s Chinese ties: “the bigger move is to use this moment to drive 
deeper conversations around algorithms, transparency, and content moderation, 
and to develop stricter rules of the road” (Mayer, 2020, para. 11). Mayer stated that 
he accepted the scrutiny the company received based on its Chinese origins and 
embraced “the challenge of giving peace of mind through greater transparency 
and accountability…Even more, we believe our entire industry should be held to an 
exceptionally high standard” (Mayer, 2020, para. 5). It is unclear whether these 
statements reflect a genuine commitment by TikTok. They may simply be an offen­
sive rhetorical tactic in an ongoing political battle. Nonetheless, it appears TikTok 
has attempted to leverage the scrutiny over its data policies and practices to initi­
ate a broader debate about the politics of platforms and the problems inherent to 
almost all market participants. 
Despite TikTok’s actions and rhetoric, on 31 July 2020, President Trump confirmed 
that he was indeed intending to ban TikTok in the US (Trump, 2020a). Several days 
later, Microsoft released a statement explaining that its representatives had spo­
ken to President Trump directly regarding the acquisition of TikTok (Microsoft, 
2020). Microsoft also confirmed that it was in discussions with ByteDance and that 
any acquisition would include a term ensuring all US user data is stored only in 
the US (Microsoft, 2020). Speaking about his conversations with Microsoft, Presi­
dent Trump stated, “it can’t be controlled, for security reasons, by China. Too big, 
too invasive, and it can’t be” (Trump, 2020b, para. 451). Trump also commented 
12
Internet Policy Review 10(2) | 2021


that he wanted “no security problems with China. It’s got to be an American com­
pany. It’s got to be American security. It’s got to be owned here” (Trump, 2020c, 
para. 91). For the Trump administration, regardless of any enhanced transparency 
by TikTok or the benefits of increased competition in the US digital platform mar­
ket, TikTok was to be treated as a Chinese asset, one that could be leveraged to 
enhance Chinese state power in relation to the US. 
On 3 August 2020, Chinese Foreign Ministry Spokesperson, Wang Wenbin, com­
mented that the US government’s involvement in the negotiations between Mi­
crosoft and ByteDance was a “violation of market economy rules” and he called on 
the US to “stop politicizing economic and trade issues, and stop practicing discrim­
inatory and exclusive policies in the name of national security” (Wenbin, 2020a, 
paras. 5-6). On 4 August 2020, Wenbin added “it is nothing new for the US to use 
its state machine to suppress foreign companies” (Wenbin, 2020b, para. 34). In its 
response, China sought to position the US government’s rhetoric and actions over 
TikTok as an act of economic nationalism. Certainly, the intervention by a US Presi­
dent to force the sale of a private company stands at odds with principles of free 
market capitalism, and the Trump administration may have been motivated in 
some part by a desire to protect a thriving American industry. Yet, both states have 
more to gain in this contest than economic benefits alone. The US position on Tik­
Tok falls within a broader contest over the strategic capacities at play in the digital 
environment and within a broader set of policy objectives. 
On 5 August 2020, the US Department of State announced an expansion of its 
Clean Network programme, which has the stated objective of “guarding our citi­
zens’ privacy and our companies’ most sensitive information from aggressive intru­
sions by malign actors, such as the Chinese Communist Party (CCP)” (Pompeo, 
2020, para. 1). Expansions to the programme included five new policies aimed ex­
plicitly at reducing the presence of China in the US, by limiting the use of Chinese 
providers of telecommunication carriers, applications sold in app stores and pre-
installed on devices, cloud services, and undersea cables. When discussing the ex­
panded programme Pompeo called for its “allies and partners in government and 
industry around the world to join the growing tide to secure our data from the 
CCP’s surveillance state and other malign entities” (Pompeo, 2020, para. 5). In 
keeping with its strategy of offshore balancing, the Trump administration sought 
to leverage its global alliances and partnerships to limit the growth of Chinese 
companies in the digital environment; as with, for example, Huawei, which the 
Trump administration pressured allies to ban (successfully so in the case of the UK 
and Canada where Huawei has been stopped from providing 5G network infra­
13
Gray


structure) (Ljunggren, 2020; Baker & Chalmers, 2020). 
The following day, the Trump administration issued an executive order aimed at 
forcing the sale of TikTok to a US company (Trump, 2020d). It did so by prohibiting 
transactions with Bytedance by any person in the US after 45 days from the issue 
of the executive order. The order specified that the prohibition was necessary in 
the context of a national emergency relating to “the spread in the United States of 
mobile applications developed and owned by companies in the People’s Republic 
of China” (Trump, 2020d, para. 2). The order posited that TikTok posed a threat to 
“the national security, foreign policy, and economy of the United States” and that 
TikTok’s data collection might allow the Chinese government “access to Americans’ 
personal and proprietary information—potentially allowing China to track the loca­
tions of Federal employees and contractors, build dossiers of personal information 
for blackmail, and conduct corporate espionage” (Trump, 2020d, para. 3). A similar 
order was issued against the Chinese company Tencent Holdings Ltd which owns 
the messaging app WeChat (Trump, 2020e). On 14 August 2020, the Trump admin­
istration announced a second executive order requiring Bytedance to divest from 
TikTok on the grounds that a review by the US Committee on Foreign Investment 
found credible evidence to suggest that Bytedance’s acquisition of Musical.ly 
posed a threat to US national security (Trump, 2020f). 
Responding to the actions taken against it by the Trump administration, TikTok ar­
gued there was no evidence to support the administration’s position and the exec­
utive orders lacked due process (TikTok Newsroom, 2020b). The company ex­
plained that it had tried to engage in good faith negotiations to address security 
concerns but the US government “paid no attention to facts, dictated terms of an 
agreement without going through standard legal processes, and tried to insert it­
self into negotiations between private businesses” (TikTok Newsroom, 2020b, para. 
2). TikTok asserted that the executive order showed the US government was rely­
ing on “unnamed "reports" with no citations, fears that the app "may be" used for 
misinformation campaigns with no substantiation of such fears, and concerns 
about the collection of data that is industry standard for thousands of mobile apps 
around the world” (TikTok Newsroom, 2020b, para. 3). 
The Chinese government similarly voiced opposition to the executive orders. In 
support of TikTok, China’s Foreign Ministry Spokesperson, Zhao Lijian, called for 
the US to “correct its hysterical and wrong actions, come back to market principles 
and WTO norms, and stop unjustified suppression and discriminatory restriction 
targeting Chinese companies” (Lijian, 2020a, para. 53). Spokesperson Lijian also 
emphasised the strong foundations TikTok already has in the US, pointing to the 
14
Internet Policy Review 10(2) | 2021


senior TikTok staff who are US citizens, TikTok’s US operations including company 
servers and data centres, and hundreds of American employees (Lijian, 2020b). Li­
jian argued that US national security concerns were unfounded and the US was 
acting in contravention of free market principles and international trade laws: 
even a CIA assessment says there's no evidence that China intercepted TikTok 
data or used the app to bore into cell phones. A think-tank in the US also said 
that there is no security justification for banning an app merely because it is 
owned by a Chinese company. This proves once again that "freedom and 
security" is nothing more than an excuse for some US politicians to pursue 
gunboat diplomacy in the digital age. Such bullying practices are a flagrant 
denial of the principles of market economy and fair competition, of which the 
US is a self-claimed "champion". (Lijian, 2020b, para. 13) 
China also called for the US to reverse its executive orders (Lijian, 2020b), but, in 
late August, it announced new technology export rules that apply to artificial in­
telligence technology which may limit Bytedance’s capacity to sell TikTok’s ma­
chine learning algorithms. The Chinese government advised TikTok to “seriously 
and cautiously” review the rules and consider their implication for the intended US 
sale (Xiao & Lin, 2020, para. 5). In effect, China retaliated against the US with its 
own policy intervention aimed at spoiling negotiations over the sale of TikTok to a 
US firm. 
This snapshot of the controversy over TikTok’s rise in the US provides a useful case 
study in the current geopolitics of platforms which is in large part defined by shifts 
in the world order caused by the economic rise of China and its implications for US 
hegemony. Essentially, TikTok has found itself in the middle of a contest between 
two nations over the strategic and economic value of the digital environment. Cer­
tainly, in 2020 TikTok was also at the whim of an idiosyncratic and highly transac­
tional US President who may have been motivated by personal misgivings against 
TikTok (Lorenz et al., 2020), a desire to unconventionally profit from its sale 
(Davidson, 2020) and his particular view of the US-China economic relationship 
(Mason et al., 2020). Nonetheless, the Trump administration’s actions and rhetoric 
towards TikTok are consistent with a geopolitical analysis which suggests that re­
gardless of specific leaders or foreign policy approaches, since the end of the Cold 
War, the US has pursued a hegemonic geopolitical strategy informed by its “territo­
rial nation-state identity” (Sharp, 2000, p. 332) defined by its geographical isola­
tion and capacity to undertake offshore balancing. In other words, there is a logic 
that underlies the US government’s view of TikTok, as evidenced by policymakers 
15
Gray


such as Pompeo and O’Brien, that is consistent with many decades of US geopoliti­
cal strategy. In the game of platform geopolitics, as China has begun to amass in­
formation and communication capacities (Hong, 2017; Thussu, 2018), the US is 
taking strategic policy action to preserve its advantages. 
To be sure, China can not claim any high road in this geopolitical contest. In 2018, 
China forced Apple to move data about Chinese citizens to data centres located in 
China and certain US technology companies are completely banned from operat­
ing there (O’Hara & Hall, 2018). Indeed, both nations have a history of sustaining 
protectionist policies aimed at shielding strategically important industries (Lenway 
et al., 1996). By no means are China and the US the only states participating in the 
geopolitics platforms; the European Union, for example, recently issued a paper 
exploring the potential for greater ‘digital sovereignty’ for that region (Madiega, 
2020) and in 2020 India banned TikTok and 58 other apps on the grounds that 
they were a “threat to sovereignty and integrity of India” (Press Information Bureau 
Delhi, 2020).The geopolitics of the digital environment is multifaceted. And yet, 
once we recognise the geopolitical motivations underpinning a platform contro­
versy such as this, the harder challenge is working out how to move beyond con­
ventional geopolitical bounds—neither US nor Chinese hegemony in the digital 
environment is ideal or inevitable—and there are other important policy consider­
ations relevant to this platform controversy. 
3. Digital platform competition: imagining a world 
order for the digital environment unbound from 
conventional geopolitics 
TikTok provides significant competition to the US platform incumbents. But, so far, 
the US government has opted to explicitly focus on the geopolitical implications 
of TikTok, rather than the implications for the US digital platform market. Whether 
the Biden administration will take a similar approach to that of the Trump admin­
istration remains to be seen. Importantly though, TikTok’s willingness to increase 
transparency beyond current industry standards indicates that, when pressed, plat­
forms can adapt in areas such as security, transparency and accountability. TikTok’s 
immense global user base also indicates the willingness of consumers to adopt 
products regardless of their country of origin. If real competition and user choice 
were to increase, requiring the incumbent platforms to compete for users more ac­
tively, we might see further innovations in the digital platform market and a dilu­
tion of the concentrated private power wielded by the incumbent market actors 
(Ghosh & Couldry, 2020). 
16
Internet Policy Review 10(2) | 2021


Free market economic theory suggests competition will occur if markets are free 
from government regulation and other state interventions, under the assumption 
of a level playing field for all market participants (Harvey, 2007). But, in the digital 
platform market, there are embedded companies who enjoy advantages from 
economies of scale and high barriers to entry, often resulting from vast and self-
perpetuating data stores (Pasquale, 2015; Plantin et al, 2016). Under these condi­
tions, competition is unlikely to spontaneously occur. In recent years, scholars have 
proposed a range of pathways for improving competition in digital platform mar­
kets (see e.g. Burdon, 2020; Daly, 2016; Flew et al., 2019; Khan, 2016, 2019; 
Svantesson, 2017; Winseck, 2020). Following these scholars and, more recently, 
certain policymakers (see e.g. Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, 
2019, 2021; European Commission, 2020; Favaro Corvo Ribas & Maximiano 
Munhoz, 2020; Utsunomiya & Takamiya, 2020), two types of market reform inter­
ventions appear particularly urgent: antitrust measures including breaking up ver­
tically and horizontally integrated firms and the effective application of rules that 
limit the expansion of market incumbents through mergers and acquisitions; and 
the widespread adoption of data portability and interoperability standards that 
meaningfully address power asymmetries and barriers to entry into data-driven 
markets. 
Geopolitical forces have the potential to both aid and hinder platform market re­
form agendas, depending on the nature and level of international cooperation (van 
Dijck et al., 2018). Successfully regulating companies with transnational opera­
tions, such as Facebook, Google and Amazon, is likely to require substantial inter­
national cooperation. Recently, Winseck and Puppis (2020) collated over 88 differ­
ent platform regulation inquiries, reviews and proceedings undertaken in jurisdic­
tions around the world between 2016 and 2020. A high number of regulatory ini­
tiatives globally suggests a high level of willingness among lawmakers globally to 
address the problems created by market concentration in the digital economy, yet 
so far there has not been a coordinated global regulatory undertaking. Any such 
undertaking would inevitably require confronting the countervailing force of digi­
tal nationalism (Mann & Daly, 2020; Pohle & Thiel, 2020). A challenge for interest­
ed researchers and policymakers is the pursuit of an agenda that will incentivise 
nation-states from around the globe to overcome nationalistic impulses and eco­
nomic protectionism, in order to realise the benefits of competition, innovation, 
and the decentralisation of power in the digital economy. 
The dilution or dispersal of geopolitical power derived from the digital economy 
would require competitive market participants from more countries than the US 
17
Gray


and China. In addition to market reforms, this objective could be supported by na­
tional digital infrastructure and investment programmes aimed at growing domes­
tic platform economies. Specific programmes would need to be tailored to suit na­
tional economies, taking into account economic conditions, existing resources, and 
industry capacities, but undoubtedly, they must extend beyond microeconomic in­
vestments such as industry grants or start-up incubators. To spur innovation, poli­
cymakers must think big; at the scale of, for example, high speed rail programmes; 
national highway projects; or national broadband initiatives (Winseck, 2020). 
More work is required to identify the most viable pathways for achieving a com­
petitive international digital platform market and avoiding the solidification of 
conventional geopolitical power dynamics within the digital environment. To sum­
marise, a research agenda with this goal might comprise the following streams of 
inquiry: 
1. How can nation-state collaboration in the regulation of platforms be 
extended, beyond existing multilateral and regional undertakings, to 
achieve a globally coordinated regulatory approach to market reforms for 
greater platform competition? 
2. How might growing international consensus about the need for 
interventions to reduce concentrated private power be reconciled with 
digital nationalism, with a view to achieving a more decentralised digital 
environment? 
3. What types of national infrastructure and investment programmes could a 
state implement, complementing market reforms, to support emerging 
digital platforms to overcome existing barriers to entry into markets 
nationally and internationally? 
Ambitious legal, economic, and technical policy undertakings are politically diffi­
cult, but they should not be relegated to the theoretical. China is acting on at least 
two of these policy fronts. The China Standards 2035 industry policy plan is ex­
pected to outline an agenda to enable China to set the technical standards for the 
future development of advanced technological systems including artificial intelli­
gence, the Internet of Things, and 5G internet (Kharpal, 2020). This plan is expect­
ed to work in concert with the country’s Belt and Road Initiative, through which 
China is investing in infrastructure and trade corridors throughout Eurasia and oth­
er nearby regions (Koyt, 2020), and will be used to export Chinese technical stan­
dards (Cai, 2017). For those concerned about the future distribution of power in 
the digital environment, now is the time to take up the challenge of devising inno­
vative and ambitious policy programmes. 
18
Internet Policy Review 10(2) | 2021


Conclusion 
On the basis of its data policies and practices, TikTok poses no greater security 
threat to its users than do its counterparts. Almost all of the most widely used dig­
ital platforms threaten the privacy and security of users, they all have the capacity 
for immense ideological influence, and they exploit user data for economic gain. 
As a geopolitical analysis makes clear, TikTok has found itself in the middle of a 
contest over the value of the digital environment and the US is eager to preserve 
the economic and strategic advantages it has enjoyed for several decades. In many 
ways, though, this is a familiar economic story: market incumbents striving to sus­
tain their privileged positions, policymakers seeking to protect strategically impor­
tant industries. But, if policymakers were to embrace platform competition, rather 
than rejecting it along conventional geopolitical grounds, there is potential for 
greater innovation and a dilution of the concentration of power in the internation­
al platform market. Achieving a competitive market, and eschewing conventional 
geopolitical power dynamics, is a monumental challenge. It will require highly am­
bitious public policy interventions. But it is a challenge worth taking up. The con­
centration of private power in the digital environment diminishes democratic soci­
eties and we should seek solutions that look beyond both US and Chinese hege­
monic power. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The author wishes to thank the following people for their valuable feedback on 
earlier drafts of this paper: editors Frédéric Dubois and Angela Daly, reviewers 
Lotus Ruan and Madison Cartwright, Mark Burdon, Bondy Kaye, Huon Curtis, 
Ariadna Matamoros Fernandez, Nic Suzor, Jean Burgess and Dipayan Ghosh. 
References 
Alcaro, R. (2018). The Liberal Order and its Contestations. A Conceptual Framework. The 
International Spectator, 53(1), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1080/03932729.2018.1397878 
Alexander, J. (2020, August 2). TikTok’s a year old, when will its creators make money? The Verge. htt
ps://www.theverge.com/2019/8/2/20748770/tiktok-monetization-youtube-anniversary-twitch-face
book-creators 
Al-Heeti, A. (2020, June 26). IOS 14 drives TikTok to stop grabbing info from users’ clipboards, 
report says. CNET. https://www.cnet.com/news/ios-14-drives-tiktok-to-stop-grabbing-info-from-use
rs-clipboards-report-says/ 
19
Gray


Andrews, P. C. (2020, June 2). How TikTok got political. The Conversation. http://theconversation.co
m/how-tiktok-got-political-139629 
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission. (2017, December 4). ACCC Commences Inquiry 
into Digital Platforms [Press release]. Australian Competition and Consumer Commission. https://ww
w.accc.gov.au/media-release/accc-commences-inquiry-into-digital-platforms 
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission. (2019). Digital platforms inquiry. https://www.ac
cc.gov.au/system/files/Digital%20platforms%20inquiry%20-%20final%20report.pdf 
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission. (2021, March 11). Feedback sought on choice and 
competition in internet search and web browsers [Press release]. Australian Competition and 
Consumer Commission. https://www.accc.gov.au/media-release/feedback-sought-on-choice-and-co
mpetition-in-internet-search-and-web-browsers 
Baker, L., & Chalmers, J. (2020). As Britain bans Huawei, U.S. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-brita
in-huawei-europe-idUSKCN24F1XG 
Balkin, J. M. (2017). Free speech in the algorithmic society: Big data, private governance, and new 
school speech regulation. UCDL Rev, 51, 1149. 
Bella, T. (2020). Pompeo says the U.S. is ‘certainly looking at’ banning TikTok and other Chinese 
apps. Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/nation/2020/07/07/tiktok-ban-china-usa-
pompeo/ 
Birnhack, M. D., & Elkin-Koren, N. (2003). The Invisible Handshake: The Reemergence of the State 
in the Digital Environment. Va. JL & Tech, 8, 6–13. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.381020 
Burdon, M. (2020). Digital Data Collection and Information Privacy Law. Cambridge University Press. 
Cai, P. (2017). Understanding China’s Belt and Road Initiative. Think-Asia, Lowy Institute For 
International Policy. 
Cartwright, M. (2020). Internationalising state power through the internet: Google, Huawei and 
geopolitical struggle. Internet Policy Review, 9(3). https://doi.org/10.14763/2020.3.1494 
Centre, T. S. (2020a). Safety Center—Resources | TikTok. https://www.tiktok.com/safety/resources/trans
parency-report?lang=en&appLaunch= 
Centre, T. S. (2020b). TikTok Transparency Report. https://www.tiktok.com/safety/resources/transpare
ncy-report?lang=en&appLaunch= 
Chan, C. (2018). When AI is the Product: The Rise of AI-Based Consumer Apps. Andreessen Horowitz. 
https://a16z.com/2018/12/03/when-ai-is-the-product-the-rise-of-ai-based-consumer-apps/ 
Chen, X., Kaye, D. B., & Zeng, J. (2020). #PositiveEnergy Douyin: Constructing ‘Playful Patriotism’ in 
a Chinese Short-Video Application. Chinese Journal of Communication. https://doi.org/10.1080/17544
750.2020.1761848 
Clayton, J. (2020). TikTok’s Boogaloo extremism problem. BBC News (Online. https://www.bbc.com/n
ews/technology-53269361 
Cloutier, R. (2020a). Our approach to security—Newsroom | TikTok. https://newsroom.tiktok.com/en-u
s/our-approach-to-security 
Cloutier, R. (2020b). TikTok’s security and data privacy roadmap—Newsroom | TikTok. https://newsroo
m.tiktok.com/en-us/tiktoks-security-and-data-privacy-roadmap 
20
Internet Policy Review 10(2) | 2021


Cloutier, R. (2020c). Updates on our security roadmap—Newsroom | TikTok. https://newsroom.tiktok.co
m/en-us/updates-on-our-security-roadmap 
Commission, E. (2020). The Digital Markets Act: Ensuring fair and open digital markets [Text. 
European Commission. https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/priorities-2019-2024/europe-fit-digital-ag
e/digital-markets-act-ensuring-fair-and-open-digital-markets_en 
Daly, A. (2016). Private Power, Online Information Flows and EU Law: Mind the Gap. Hart. 
Datareportal. (2021). Global Social Media Stats. DataReportal – Global Digital Insights. https://datar
eportal.com/social-media-users 
Davidson, H. (2020). TikTok sale: Trump approves Microsoft’s plan but says US should get a cut of any 
deal. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2020/aug/03/tiktok-row-trump-to-tak
e-action-soon-says-pompeo-as-microsoft-pursues-deal 
DeNardis, L., & Hackl, A. M. (2015). Internet Governance by Social Media Platforms. 
Telecommunications Policy, 39(9), 761–770. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.telpol.2015.04.003 
Donzelli, G., Palomba, G., Federigi, I., Aquino, F., Cioni, L., Verani, M., Carducci, A., & Lopalco, P. 
(2018). Misinformation on vaccination: A quantitative analysis of YouTube videos. Human Vaccines & 
Immunotherapeutics, 14(7), 1654–1659. https://doi.org/10.1080/21645515.2018.1454572 
Ebenstein, E. (2019, December 31). Our first Transparency Report. TikTok Newsroom. https://newsroo
m.tiktok.com/en-us/our-first-transparency-report 
Facebook. (2019). Requests For User Data. https://transparency.facebook.com/government-data-requ
ests 
Favaro Corvo Ribas, G., & Maximiano Munhoz, N. (2020, October 26). The Brazil Antitrust Agency’s 
new study on digital markets. International Bar Association. https://www.ibanet.org/Article/NewDeta
il.aspx?ArticleUid=48D83F91-8874-4F3B-8FCF-E85A384BA841 
Flew, T., Martin, F., & Suzor, N. (2019). Internet Regulation as Media Policy: Rethinking the Question 
of Digital Communication Platform Governance. Journal of Digital Media & Policy, 10(1), 33–50. http
s://doi.org/10.1386/jdmp.10.1.33_1 
Flint, C. (2016). Introduction to Geopolitics (3rd ed.). Taylor and Francis. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781
315640044 
Fowler, G. (2020, July 13). Is it time to delete TikTok? A guide to the rumors and the real privacy 
risks. The Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2020/07/13/tiktok-privac
y/ 
Ghosh, D., & Couldry, N. (2020). Digital Realignment: Rebalancing Platform Economies from 
Corporation to Consumer (Working Paper No. 155; Mossavar-Rahmani Center for Business and 
Government). 
Gillespie, T. (2010). The politics of ‘platforms’. 12(3), 347–364. https://doi.org/10.1177/14614448093
42738 
Gillespie, T. (2018). Custodians of the Internet: Platforms, Content Moderation, and the Hidden 
Decisions that Shape Social Media. Yale University Press. 
Google Inc. (2020). Google Transparency Report. https://transparencyreport.google.com/?hl=en 
Gray, J. (2020). Google Rules: The History and Future of Copyright Under the Influence of Google. Oxford 
21
Gray


University Press. 
Harvey, D. (2007). A Brief History of Neoliberalism. Oxford University Press. 
Hern, A. (2019). Revealed: How TikTok censors videos that do not please Beijing. The Guardian. http://w
ww.theguardian.com/technology/2019/sep/25/revealed-how-tiktok-censors-videos-that-do-not-ple
ase-beijing 
Hong, Y. (2017). Networking China: The Digital Transformation of the Chinese Economy. University of 
Illinois Press. https://doi.org/10.5406/illinois/9780252040917.001.0001 
Isaak, J., & Hanna, M. J. (2018). User data privacy: Facebook, Cambridge Analytica, and privacy 
protection. Computer, 51(8), 56–59. https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2018.3191268 
Jia, L., & Ruan, L. (2020). Going global: Comparing Chinese mobile applications’ data and user 
privacy governance at home and abroad. Internet Policy Review, 9(3). https://doi.org/10.14763/202
0.3.1502 
Kaye, B., Rodriguez, A., Langton, K., & Wikstrom, P. (In press). You Made This? I Made This: Practices 
of Authorship and (Mis)Attribution on TikTok. International Journal of Communication. 
Keane, S. (2020, September 11). Huawei ban timeline: Chinese company’s Harmony OS may hit 
phones next year. CNET. https://www.cnet.com/news/huawei-ban-full-timeline-us-restrictions-chin
a-trump-android-google-ban-harmony-os/ 
Kelly, P. (2006). A Critique of Critical Geopolitics. Geopolitics, 11(1), 24–53. https://doi.org/10.1080/1
4650040500524053 
Khan, L. (2019). The Separation of Platforms and Commerce. Columbia Law Review, 119(4), 
973–1098. https://columbialawreview.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Khan-THE_SEPARATION_O
F_PLATFORMS_AND_COMMERCE-1.pdf 
Khan, L. M. (2016). Amazon’s antitrust paradox. Yale Law Journal, 126(3), 710–805. https://digitalco
mmons.law.yale.edu/ylj/vol126/iss3/3/ 
Kharpal, A. (2020, April 27). Power is “up for grabs”: Behind China’s plan to shape the future of next-
generation tech. CNBC. https://www.cnbc.com/2020/04/27/china-standards-2035-explained.html 
Kitchin, R., & Lauriault, T. P. (2014). Towards critical data studies: Charting and unpacking data 
assemblages and their work (Working Paper No. 2; The Programmable City). Maynooth University. 
Koyt, A. (2020, July 2). The China Standards 2035 Plan: Is it a Follow-Up to Made in China 2025? 
China Briefing News. https://www.china-briefing.com/news/what-is-china-standards-2035-plan-ho
w-will-it-impact-emerging-technologies-what-is-link-made-in-china-2025-goals/ 
Layne, C. (1997). From preponderance to offshore balancing. International Security, 22(1), 86. http
s://doi.org/10.2307/2539331 
Lee, K.-F. (2018). AI superpowers: China, Silicon Valley, and the new world order. Houghton Mifflin 
Harcourt. 
Lenway, S., Morck, R., & Yeung, B. (1996). Rent seeking, protectionism and innovation in the 
American steel industry. The Economic Journal, 106(435), 410–421. https://doi.org/10.2307/2235256 
Lijian, Z. (2020a, August 10). Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Zhao Lijian’s Regular Press Conference on 
August 10. Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China. https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/m
fa_eng/xwfw_665399/s2510_665401/2511_665403/t1805288.shtml 
22
Internet Policy Review 10(2) | 2021


Lijian, Z. (2020b, August 17). Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Zhao Lijian’s Regular Press Conference on 
August 17. Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China. https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/m
fa_eng/xwfw_665399/s2510_665401/2511_665403/t1806940.shtml 
Ljunggren, D. (2020, August 25). Canada has effectively moved to block China’s Huawei from 5G, 
but can’t say so. Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-canada-huawei-analysis-idUSKBN25L2
6S 
Lorenz, T., Browning, K., & Frenkel, S. (2020). TikTok Teens Tank Trump Rally in Tulsa, They Say. The 
New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/21/style/tiktok-trump-rally-tulsa.html 
Lynskey, O. (2017). Aligning data protection rights with competition law remedies? The GDPR right 
to data portability. European Law Review, 42(6), 793–814. 
Maayan, P., & Elkin-Koren, N. (2016). Accountability in Algorithmic Copyright Enforcement. Stanford 
Technology Law Review, 19, 473–533. https://law.stanford.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/Accoun
tability-in-Algorithmic-Copyright-Enforcement.pdf 
Madiega, T. (2020). Digital sovereignty for Europe (Briefing PE 651.992; EPRS Ideas Papers). European 
Parliamentary Research Service. 
Mann, M., & Daly, A. (2020). Geopolitics, jurisdiction and surveillance. Internet Policy Review, 9(3). ht
tps://policyreview.info/geopolitics-jurisdiction-surveillance 
Mann, M., & Warren, I. (2018). The digital and legal divide: Silk Road, transnational online policing 
and southern criminology. In K. Carrington, R. Hogg, J. Scott, & M. Sozzo (Eds.), The Palgrave 
handbook of criminology and the global south (pp. 245–260). Palgrave MacMillan. https://doi.org/1
0.1007/978-3-319-65021-0_13 
Mason, J., Sanders, C., & Brunnstrom, D. (2020). Trump again raises idea of separating US economy 
from China. The Sydney Morning Herald. https://www.smh.com.au/business/the-economy/trump-agai
n-raises-idea-of-separating-us-economy-from-china-20200908-p55tdb.html 
Matamoros-Fernández, A. (2017). Platformed racism: The mediation and circulation of an Australian 
race-based controversy on Twitter, Facebook and YouTube. Information, Communication & Society, 
20(6), 930–946. https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2017.1293130 
Mayer, K. (2020, July 29). Fair competition and transparency benefits us all. TikTok Newsroom. http
s://newsroom.tiktok.com/en-us/fair-competition-and-transparency-benefits-us-all 
McCluskey, M. (2020, July 22). These TikTok Creators Say They’re Still Being Suppressed for Posting 
Black Lives Matter Content. Time. https://time.com/5863350/tiktok-black-creators/ 
McGill, M. H. (2020). Under fire from Washington, TikTok pledges U.S. job growth. Axios. https://ww
w.axios.com/tiktok-plans-to-add-10000-jobs-963c6ee4-9dbf-431f-9ac8-1bb381855df4.html 
Microsoft. (2020, August 2). Microsoft to continue discussions on potential TikTok purchase in the 
United States [Blog post]. The Official Microsoft Blog. https://blogs.microsoft.com/blog/2020/08/02/
microsoft-to-continue-discussions-on-potential-tiktok-purchase-in-the-united-states/ 
Misty Hong v Bytedance Inc. Class Action Complaint, (US District Court Northern District of 
California 27 November 2019). https://www.courthousenews.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/Tik
tok.pdf 
Moshin, M. (2020, July 3). 10 TikTok Statistics That You Need to Know in 2021 [Blog post]. Oberlo. ht
tps://au.oberlo.com/blog/tiktok-statistics 
23
Gray


O’Brien, R. (2020, June 24). The Chinese Communist Party’s Ideology and Global Ambitions. The White 
House. https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/briefings-statements/chinese-communist-partys-ideol
ogy-global-ambitions/ 
O’Hara, K., & Hall, W. (2018). Four internets: The geopolitics of digital governance (No. 206; CIGI 
Papers). https://www.cigionline.org/sites/default/files/documents/Paper%20no.206web.pdf 
O’loughlin, J. (1999). Ordering the ‘crush zone’: Geopolitical games in post‐cold war eastern Europe. 
Geopolitics, 4(1), 34–56. https://doi.org/10.1080/14650049908407636 
Pasquale, F. (2015). The black box society: The secret algorithms that control money and information. 
Harvard University Press. 
Plantin, J.-C., Lagoze, C., Edwards, P. N., & Sandvig, C. (2016). Infrastructure studies meet platform 
studies in the age of Google and Facebook. New Media & Society, 20(1), 293–310. https://doi.org/1
0.1177/1461444816661553 
Pohle, J., & Thiel, T. (2020). Digital sovereignty. Internet Policy Review, 9(4). https://doi.org/10.1476
3/2020.4.1532 
Pompeo, M. (2020, August 5). Announcing the Expansion of the Clean Network to Safeguard America’s 
Assets [Press statement]. U. S. Department of State. https://www.state.gov/announcing-the-expansi
on-of-the-clean-network-to-safeguard-americas-assets/ 
Press Information Bureau Delhi. (2020, June 29). Government Bans 59 mobile apps which are 
prejudicial to sovereignty and integrity of India, defence of India, security of state and public order. Press 
Information Bureau, Government of India, Ministry of Electronics & IT. pib.gov.in/Pressreleaseshar
e.aspx?PRID=1635206 
Roach, S. (2014). Unbalanced: The Codependency of America and China. Yale University Press. 
Romm, T. (2020, July 30). Big tech hearing: Apple, Google, Facebook and Amazon CEOs testified 
before Congress. The Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2020/07/29/a
pple-google-facebook-amazon-congress-hearing/ 
Sanger, D. E., & Barnes, J. E. (2020, August 7). Is TikTok More of a Parenting Problem Than a 
Security Threat? The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/08/07/us/politics/tiktok-secur
ity-threat.html 
Sharp, J. (2000). Refiguring Geopolitics (K. Dodds & D. Atkinson, Eds.). Routledge. 
Shead, S. (2020, May 27). TikTok owner ByteDance reportedly made a profit of $3 billion on $17 
billion of revenue last year. CNBC. https://www.cnbc.com/2020/05/27/tiktok-bytedance-profit.html 
Sicker, M. (2010). Geography and Politics Among Nations: An Introduction to Geopolitics. iUniverse. 
Spangler, T. (2016, September 30). Musical.ly’s Live.ly Is Now Bigger Than Twitter’s Periscope on iOS 
(Study). Variety. https://variety.com/2016/digital/news/musically-lively-bigger-than-periscope-1201
875105/ 
Suzor, N. P. (2019). Lawless: The Secret Rules That Govern Our Digital Lives. Cambridge University 
Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108666428 
Suzor, N. P., Myers West, S., Quodling, A., & York, J. (2019). What Do We Mean When We Talk About 
Transparency? Toward Meaningful Transparency in Commercial Content Moderation. International 
Journal of Communication, 13, 1526–1543. https://ijoc.org/index.php/ijoc/article/view/9736/0 
24
Internet Policy Review 10(2) | 2021


Svantesson, D. J. B. (2017). Solving the internet jurisdiction puzzle. Oxford University Press. https://do
i.org/10.1093/oso/9780198795674.001.0001 
Thussu, D. (2018). A new global communication order for a multipolar world. Communication 
Research and Practice, 4(1), 52–66. https://doi.org/10.1080/22041451.2018.1432988 
TikTok. (2020). Tiktok Law Enforcement. https://www.tiktok.com/legal/law-enforcement 
TikTok Newsroom. (2019, August 16). Statement on TikTok’s content moderation and data security 
practices. TikTok Newsroom. https://newsroom.tiktok.com/en-us/statement-on-tiktoks-content-mod
eration-and-data-security-practices 
TikTok Newsroom. (2020a, June 19). How TikTok recommends videos #ForYou. TikTok Newsroom. http
s://newsroom.tiktok.com/en-us/how-tiktok-recommends-videos-for-you 
TikTok Newsroom. (2020b, August 7). Statement on the Administration’s Executive Order. TikTok 
Newsroom. https://newsroom.tiktok.com/en-us/tiktok-responds 
Toal, G., Tuathail, G. Ó., Dalby, S., & Routledge, P. (1998). The geopolitics reader. Routledge. 
Trump, D. (2020a, July 31). Remarks by President Trump Before Marine One Departure. The White 
House. https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/briefings-statements/remarks-president-trump-marin
e-one-departure-073120/ 
Trump, D. (2020b, August 3). Remarks by President Trump in a Meeting with U.S. Tech Workers and 
Signing of an Executive Order on Hiring American. The White House. https://trumpwhitehouse.archive
s.gov/briefings-statements/remarks-president-trump-meeting-u-s-tech-workers-signing-executive-
order-hiring-american/ 
Trump, D. (2020c, August 3). Remarks by President Trump in Press Briefing. https://trumpwhitehouse.a
rchives.gov/briefings-statements/remarks-president-trump-press-briefing-august-3-2020/ 
Trump, D. (2020d, August 6). Executive Order on Addressing the Threat Posed by TikTok. The White 
House. https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/presidential-actions/executive-order-addressing-thre
at-posed-tiktok/ 
Trump, D. (2020e, August 6). Executive Order on Addressing the Threat Posed by WeChat. The White 
House. https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/presidential-actions/executive-order-addressing-thre
at-posed-wechat/ 
Trump, D. (2020f, August 14). Order Regarding the Acquisition of Musical.ly by ByteDance Ltd. The 
White House. https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/presidential-actions/order-regarding-acquisitio
n-musical-ly-bytedance-ltd/ 
Tusikov, N. (2019). How US-made rules shape internet governance in China. Internet Policy Review, 
8(2). https://doi.org/10.14763/2019.2.1408 
Utsunomiya, H., & Takamiya, Y. (2020). Japan. In C. Jeffs (Ed.), E-Commerce Competition Enforcement 
Guide (3rd ed.). Global Competition Review. https://globalcompetitionreview.com/guide/e-commerc
e-competition-enforcement-guide/third-edition/article/japan 
van Dijck, J., Poell, T., & Waal, M. (2018). The Platform Society (Vol. 1). Oxford University Press. http
s://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780190889760.001.0001 
Wang, C. (2020, June 7). Why TikTok made its user so obsessive? The AI Algorithm that got you 
hooked [Blog post]. Towards Data Science. https://towardsdatascience.com/why-tiktok-made-its-use
25
Gray


r-so-obsessive-the-ai-algorithm-that-got-you-hooked-7895bb1ab423 
Wang, E. (2020, July 7). TikTok says it will exit Hong Kong market within days. Reuters. https://ww
w.reuters.com/article/us-tiktok-hong-kong-exclusive-idUSKBN2480AD 
Wells, G., Horwitz, J., & Viswanatha, A. (2020, August 23). Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg Stoked 
Washington’s Fears About TikTok. The Wall Street Journal. https://www.wsj.com/articles/facebook-ce
o-mark-zuckerberg-stoked-washingtons-fears-about-tiktok-11598223133 
Wenbin, W. (2020a, August 3). Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Wang Wenbin’s Regular Press Conference 
on August 3. Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China. https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/
mfa_eng/xwfw_665399/s2510_665401/2511_665403/t1803668.shtml 
Wenbin, W. (2020b, August 4). Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Wang Wenbin’s Regular Press Conference 
on August 4. Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China. https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/
mfa_eng/xwfw_665399/s2510_665401/2511_665403/t1803971.shtml 
Williams, K. (2020, February 7). Top Apps Worldwide for January 2020 by Downloads [Blog post]. 
Sensor Tower Blog. https://sensortower.com/blog/top-apps-worldwide-january-2020-by-downloads 
Winseck, D. (2020). Vampire squids, ‘the broken internet’ and platform regulation. Journal of Digital 
Media & Policy, 11(3), 241–282. https://doi.org/10.1386/jdmp_00025_1 
Winseck, D., & Puppis, M. (2020). Platform Regulation Inquiries [Unpublished manuscript]. 
Xiao, E., & Lin, L. (2020, August 30). TikTok Talks Could Face Hurdle as China Tightens Tech Export 
Rules. The Wall Street Journal. https://www.wsj.com/articles/china-tightens-ai-export-restrictions-11
598703527 
Xuetong, Y. (2019). The Age of Uneasy Peace: Chinese Power in a Divided World. Foreign Affairs, 
98(1), 40–49. https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/china/2018-12-11/age-uneasy-peace 
Yan, F. (2020, May 7). Diversity on Social Media: What We Can Learn From TikTok [Blog post]. RE-UP 
Agency. https://thisisreup.com/2020/05/07/diversity-on-social-media-what-we-can-learn-from-tikto
k/ 
Zhang, Z. (2020). Infrastructuralization of TikTok: Transformation, power relationships, and 
platformization of video entertainment in China. Media, Culture & Society, 43(2), 219–236. https://d
oi.org/10.1177/0163443720939452 
in cooperation with
Published by
26
Internet Policy Review 10(2) | 2021
