10.2478/v10099-012-0013-9
Journal of Teacher Education for Sustainability,
vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 130–146, 2012
TEACHER EDUCATION FOR SUSTAINABILITY IN NETWORK 
SOCIETY: COMBINING DIGITAL AND SUSTAINABILITY 
LITERACIES
John Huckle
University of York, the United Kingdom
Abstract
How should teacher education for sustainability (TEfS) respond to new information and com-
munication technologies that can enable new forms of social and environmental relations and 
new forms of pedagogy? To answer that question, this article will consider the potential of Web 
2.0 technologies or social media to enrich the content and pedagogy of education for sustainable 
development in both university and school classrooms. It will suggest that teachers should be 
introduced to critical social theory that seeks to explain the role of these new technologies in the 
recent wave of capitalist development that precipitated economic and ecological crisis, and their 
potential to bring about more sustainable alternatives. Such alternatives will be based on more 
radical and deliberative forms of democracy and citizenship enabled by the new technologies, 
and TEfS should equip teachers to explore these through appropriate forms of citizenship educa-
tion and model them in their classrooms via new forms of critical pedagogy. Such ideas as those 
of Erik Olin Wright on real utopias and Manuel Castells on network society provide such TEfS 
with appropriate theory, while consideration of how YouTube videos might be used to develop 
critical digital and sustainability literacies in the classroom, illustrates how such theory might be 
related to practice. 
Key words: teacher education for sustainability, education for sustainable development, network 
society
New technologies, neoliberal capitalism and unsustainable development
All teachers who claim to educate for sustainability should have a critical grasp of the struc-
tures and processes shaping the development and underdevelopment of the societies in which 
they teach. Teacher education for sustainability (TEfS) should help them understand that 
information and communication technologies linked to the internet enabled, but did not 
cause, the neoliberal regime of capital accumulation that began in the late 1970s and ended 
with the financial crisis of 2007/2008. This neo-liberal era was characterised by deregula-
tion; privatisation; the privileging of corporate power; ultra-mobile capital; globalisation; 
outsourcing; imperialist militarism in Iraq and Afghanistan; growing social inequality and 


131
Teacher education for sustainability in network society: Combining digital and ..
unrest and increased environmental degradation. Designed to restore the rates of return on 
capital and further shift power to economic and political elites, it used new technologies to 
speed up the circulation of capital (for instance, just in time delivery); introduce new con-
sumer and financial products and services (personal computers, spread betting); intensify 
globalisation (global logistics networks); wage war (pilotless aircraft); control social unrest 
(video surveillance); maintain ideological control (new forms of popular entertainment and 
media); improve environmental management (remote sensing) and introduce new priorities 
to schooling (computer literacy). New technologies also provided new ways of engineering 
nature (biotechnology) and increasing the efficiency of resource use (waste free production) 
that are often represented as sustainable development. 
That neo-liberalism failed to revive capital’s fortunes and proved unsustainable is due 
to three factors: its inherent instability; the increasing cost of reproducing the conditions of 
production and the falling demand for capital investment and workers due to technological 
change. Capitalism has an inbuilt tendency to grow to a state in which it cannot sell all it pro-
duces and capital must be scrapped before a new wave of accumulation can begin. In the re-
cent neoliberal era in the West, capital accumulated as credit and property bubbles as bankers 
borrowed to speculate on increasingly complex financial products and households borrowed 
against rising property prices to maintain consumer lifestyles rendered less accessible by fall-
ing real wages. Capital was re-invested in property and financial bubbles to maintain econom-
ic growth but eventually sub-prime mortgages and complex financial products proved impos-
sible to sell at their inflated values and the whole debt dependent regime collapsed (De Santos 
et al., 2009; Harvey, 2010). In Europe, a one-size-fits-all monetary policy reinforced mounting 
instability. Countries on the periphery had higher costs and lower productivity than those in 
the core, but a common interest rate allowed them to disguise their weaknesses by borrowing 
on the strength of inflated asset-prices and credit ratings. In the absence of controls on capital 
movement, trade surpluses generated in the core were recycled into Mediterranean property 
speculation: a situation echoed in the global imbalances between China and the West. When 
property and financial bubbles burst, governments stood behind their banks, bailing them out 
at huge public cost. The result is a collapse in public investment, growing austerity, mounting 
social problems and rising unemployment, particularly amongst the young. 
Europe’s debt crisis is compounded by ecological debt as an accelerating treadmill of pro-
duction and consumption has damaged or destroyed ecological resources and services, often 
in other parts of the world. Capital finds it harder and more costly to reproduce the conditions 
of production (fertile soil, clean air and water, waste treatment, space free from pollution and 
congestion, healthy and suitably educated workers), and this is a further reason why recent 
growth has proved unsustainable (O’Connor, 1991). Capital is now seeking to shed the costs 
associated with reproducing the conditions of production by requiring citizens to pay for 
health care and education; by lobbying for further deregulation of the environment and land-
use planning and by further outsourcing production to countries with cheap resources and/
or low environmental and welfare standards (Harvey, 2011). Teachers will recognise that the 


132
John Huckle
continuing restructuring of education is part of these developments and is associated with the 
loss of professionalism and worsening conditions of service in many European states.
Technological change is the third factor contributing to neo-liberalism’s failure to revive 
capital’s fortunes. While capitalism currently requires 3% growth to absorb the constant sup-
ply of new capital created, there is a falling demand for capital investment and workers as less 
capital and labour are now needed to produce each unit of output (Shutt, 2010). As markets 
for some manufactured goods become saturated, consumer demand shifts to services that are 
less capital intensive. Web technologies deliver communication and media services at reduc-
ing cost to consumers, and conventional suppliers of music, films, newspapers and postal 
services find it increasingly difficult to make a profit. There is growing resistance to intellec-
tual property rights, a growth of open-source products, such as Linux and Wikipedia, and a 
readiness to use services, such as eBay, to buy used rather than new goods. While some take 
a positive view of Web 2.0’s potential for business (Tapscott & Williams, 2008, 2010), the dot 
com boom and bust of 1995–2000 illustrates the uncertainty that information and communi-
cation technology (ICT) brings to financial markets and the associated threat to investor con-
fidence. Economic instability is compounded by high levels of unemployment that increase 
the costs of welfare, further reduce demand and pose issues for teachers seeking to motivate 
older school students.
Network society, the network state and networked individuals
Castells (2008) offers teachers a new way of understanding the societies created by neo-liberal 
capitalism and enabled by new technologies. He maintains that we live in a world marked by 
globalisation: the process that constitutes a social system with the capacity to work as a single 
unit on a planetary scale in real or chosen time. ICT, including rapid transportation and com-
puter networks, gives the system the technological capacity to selectively connect anyone and 
anything to global networks that structure the planet and through which flow people, energy, 
materials and information. All the world’s core economic, communicative and cultural activi-
ties have become dependent on strategic nodes in these networks that include global financial 
markets; global production and distribution of goods and services; international trade; global 
networks of science and technology; global media and global interactive networks of com-
munication. 
Critical issues facing people and governments around the world, such as the need for 
more sustainable forms of development, are largely produced and shaped by interdependent 
global processes that move beyond the realm of supposedly sovereign states. The power of the 
state is challenged by that of transnational corporations and undermined by agents within 
global civil society that seek alternative forms of global governance. As politics shifts to the 
global arena, the nation state is the source of four distinct but interrelated political crises:
•	
Crisis of efficiency. Problems such as climate change or regulation of financial mar-
kets cannot be adequately managed.
•	
Crisis of legitimacy. Governments that are less efficient lose their legitimacy and 


133
Teacher education for sustainability in network society: Combining digital and ..
support from citizens. In network society, the media become the essential space of 
politics and its resulting simplification to images, personalities, sound bites, scan-
dal and spin, has deepened the crisis of legitimacy. Many see politicians as self-
interested, corrupt and irrelevant to their lives.
•	
Crisis of identity. As people lose faith in their political identity as citizens, they seek 
autonomy in forms of resistance identity and cultural identity politics.
•	
Crisis of equity. Neo-liberalism and globalisation increase inequality within and 
between countries and social groups. Welfare states are undermined in the absence 
of a global regulatory environment.
The increasing inability of nation states to confront and manage such issues as the need for 
sustainable development leads to ad-hoc forms of global governance and ultimately to a new 
form of state. Nation states (comprising governments, parliaments, political party system, 
judiciary and state bureaucracy) transform themselves by three main mechanisms:
•	
States associate with each other forming networks of states, for instance, the 
European Union, North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
•	
States build an increasingly dense network of international institutions and supra-
national organisations to deal with global issues, for instance, the United Nations, 
International Monetary Fund, North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, United Nations 
Environment Programme..
•	
States decentralise power and resources in an effort to increase legitimacy and/or 
to tap into other forms of cultural or political allegiance, for instance, the Welsh 
Assembly in the UK.
From this three-pronged process emerges a new form of state – the network state. As it prac-
tises global governance through ad-hoc networks, it confronts major problems arising from 
the contradiction between the historically constructed nature of the institutions that come 
into the network and the new functions and mechanisms they have to assume to perform in 
the network while still relating to their nation bound societies. Coordination, ideological and 
geopolitical problems arise because the network state finds it difficult to coordinate decision-
making and policy across many issues and agencies at many scales; to find common language, 
principles and values to underpin governance in such policy areas as sustainable development 
and to abandon the old geopolitics based on the interests of nation states for a new culture 
of global cooperation. These contradictions can only be overcome if the world’s geopolitical 
actors allow the evolution of the network state into a system of constitutionally accepted net-
worked global governance or cosmopolitan democracy with associated forms of citizenship 
(Held, 1995; Ferry, 2011).
A key component of network society is the global/local media system made up of oli-
gopolistic multimedia businesses controlling the mass media and an increasingly inclusive 
hypertext; a multitude of horizontal networks of autonomous local/global communication 
and the interactions between the two systems that form a complex pattern of connections and 


134
John Huckle
disconnections. Web 2.0 technology now allows mass self-communication or networks that 
join many-to-many in the sending and receiving of messages that bypass the mass media and 
generally escape government control. The logic embedded in such networks supports a major 
change in sociability as networked individuals build identities, contacts and outlooks from 
the resources on offer according to their needs and moods. Since the scope of network society 
is both global and local (‘glocal’), such individuals are no longer tied to particular times and 
places. ICT enables the coordinates of our everyday lives to be transcended so that we can 
enter virtual times and places (computer games) and simultaneously perceive, think and act 
in both local and global terms (we buy fair traded goods locally to support banana growers 
whom we have learnt about on the internet). Networked individuals may simply escape into 
the social networks and virtual worlds that ICT offers, or they may become ‘netizens’ seeking 
more comprehensive and effective forms of global governance. Clearly, developments in the 
theory and practice of education for sustainable development (ESD) and TEfS are needed to 
acknowledge the rise of network society, the nature of students as networked individuals and 
the changing form of cultural power. 
Power in network society
Castells (2011a) argues that power in network society is exercised through the construction 
of meaning and the hold of communications and media networks over the minds of people. 
Changes in social communication and sociability enabled by ICT allow a greater diversity of 
messages and meanings to reach wider audiences, but the communication and construction 
of meaning is still shaped by four different kinds of power:
•	
Networking power: the power of actors and organisations who control networks 
to include/exclude individuals and groups (the power of editors at BBC News to 
decide who is interviewed about an issue relating to sustainable development);
•	
Network power: the power that results from the standards or rules, or inclusion 
built into the network that guide and co-ordinate social interaction (the stated and 
hidden rules that need to be followed to work in or with the World Trade Organi-
sation);
•	
Networked power: the power of actors over other actors in the network (the power 
of a moderator to edit or censor a contribution to a web-based discussion such as 
the Great Northern Debate);
•	
Network-making power: the power to programme specific networks according to 
the interests and values of the programmers and the power to link/delink differ-
ent networks following alliances/falling out between the dominant actors of those 
networks (the power to decide what links appear on ESD websites).
While all these forms of power shape people’s understanding of the world, Castells (2011a) 
considers network-making power to be the ultimate form of power. Recent events surround-
ing News International and its links with politicians and the police in the UK (the phone-


135
Teacher education for sustainability in network society: Combining digital and ..
hacking scandal) or the revelations concerning the privileged access given to the International 
Institute of Finance (a lobby group for 450 of the biggest banks in the world) to EU talks on 
Greece’s future, illustrate the close links between networks of financial, corporate and political 
power and the media networks that represent their interests. Meanwhile, the web as a source 
of individual empowerment is under threat from corporations seeking to corral users into 
marketable segments (the ‘walled gardens’ created by Facebook and Apple) and from state 
power seeking control and censorship (China’s great firewall). Laws are needed to protect our 
privacy and rights to speak and assemble in cyberspace, and Iceland’s Modern Media Initia-
tive provides a model of what is possible. Morozov (2011) and Mason (2012) adopt pessimis-
tic and optimistic views on whether the internet will spread democracy around the world, and 
it is to the role of new technologies in enabling democratisation that we now turn. 
New technologies, green socialism and sustainable development
It is now several decades since the writings of Ivan Illich and Andre Gorz warned us of the 
dangers of ‘technofacism’ in modern societies and argued the case for appropriate technol-
ogy that liberates rather than enslaves citizens. Gorz (1980) saw ecology not as an end in 
itself but as an essential part of the larger struggle against capitalism that is able to adapt to 
ecological constraints. The main goal should be an economic, social and cultural revolution 
that abolishes capitalism and establishes new sustainable relationships between the individual 
and society, between people and nature. For Gorz (1980), the key to such a society lay in the 
potential of ICT to free people from work (through automation) so that they have time to 
manage their own affairs and develop civil society to such an extent that the state’s role is 
simply that of spreading knowledge, equipping citizens for self-management and coordinat-
ing self-managing local communities from above. In 1980, he (Gorz, 1980) sketched a future 
France, with a 20 hour working week, a lively odd-job sector, a basic citizens’ income paid at 
a flat rate to all irrespective of their employment status or income, environmentally sound 
forms of production and consumption and a cultural life that encouraged the development of 
rich, all-round personalities.
Gorz’s ideas were taken up and developed by post-industrial and green socialists (Pepper, 
1993; Little, 1998; Foster, Clark, & York, 2010) who realised that the key to sustainability is 
the social control of capital to direct it into socially useful production and the social control 
of technology to ensure it is used in socially responsible ways. While these writers and others 
envisioned future utopias, green socialism has lacked a theory of transition or ways in which 
its utopias might be realised. Wright (2010) fills this gap by suggesting that socialists should 
adopt a ‘flexible strategic pluralism’ in the ways they approach the transition. This should be 
guided by a greater realism regarding economic systems; the multiple pathways they offer for 
increasing social power; the advantages and disadvantages of three logics of transformation.
Wright (2010) begins from the premise that socialism (democratic power over the al-
location and use of productive resources) requires the radical democratisation of all arenas 
of power (the state, economy, civil society) with power rooted in civil society (social power) 


136
John Huckle
controlling both state and economic power. Since all economic systems (national economies, 
firms, etc.) are complex configurations of capitalist, statist and socialist elements, transforma-
tion should not be envisioned as a binary shift from one form of power to another, but a shift 
in the configuration of power relations that constitute economic hybrids. There are multiple 
institutional forms through which social power can be increased, and Wright (2010) identifies 
a pluralist model of socialism that offers seven different kinds of pathway for democratising 
power (statist socialism; social democratic economic regulation; associational democracy; so-
cial capitalism; social economy; cooperative market economy; participatory socialism). These 
pathways allow different specific real utopian innovations with regard to democratising the 
state (Wright, (2010) explores, for instance, municipal participatory budgeting, egalitarian 
public financing of electoral campaigns, random selection of citizens’ assemblies) and econo-
my (Wikipedia, the Quebec social economy for childcare and eldercare; unconditional basic 
income, solidarity funds, share-levy wage-earner funds, the Mondragon co-op and participa-
tory economics). There are multiple strategic logics through which such innovative institu-
tions can be constructed and advanced: ruptural (creating new institutions of empowerment 
through a sharp break with existing institutions and social structures); interstitial (building 
new forms of social empowerment in the niches and margins of capitalist society); symbiotic 
(extending and deepening the institutional forms of popular social empowerment while at 
the same time helping solve certain problems faced by dominant classes and elites). Occupy 
Athens is an example of ruptural logic; the barter system in Volos, using local currency, is an 
example of interstitial logic, while the green left’s advocacy of a green new deal for Europe 
might be considered an example of symbiotic logic.
Like Harvey’s (2010) theory of co-revolutionary change, Wright’s (2010) theory of trans-
formation requires that we abandon Marx’s strong theory of the inevitable demise of capital-
ism. Both require us to recognise multiple pathways, agents and logics, to accept strategic 
indeterminacy and to continually test and retest the limits of possibility as we act and learn 
our way to sustainability. Wright (2010) provides a summary of the likely changes, most, if not 
all of them, enabled by new technologies:
Unconditional basic income frees up time for social economy participation. Share-levy 
wage-earner funds and solidarity funds enhance the capacity of unions and other asso-
ciations to control firms and investments. Worker-owned cooperatives are revitalized by 
new information technologies which make cooperation among cooperatives easier, and 
new cooperative market infrastructures are developed which buffer producer cooperatives 
from destructive market pressures. Direct state involvement in the economy is combined 
with new forms of associational participation which improve the efficiency and account-
ability of state enterprises. Participatory budgeting diffuses across a wide range of cities 
and extends to new domains of government spending. And entirely new institutions as 
yet unforeseen are invented to push forward social empowerment in new ways (Wright, 
2010, p. 373).
If social empowerment is the key to green socialism and sustainability, then it is vital that the 
web remains a source of empowerment so that groups within civil society are able to use so-


137
Teacher education for sustainability in network society: Combining digital and ..
cial media to debate and promote radical social alternatives. Such tools enable online activism 
(Hill, 2010) and deliberative democracy (Baber & Bartlett, 2005; Chadwick, 2009; William-
son, 2011) that can balance the interests of nature and future generations alongside current 
human interests and allows citizens to develop the kind of outlook that underpins ecological, 
cosmopolitan and global citizenship (Huckle, 2008). Such democracy is based on a set of 
core propositions: political equality of participants; interpersonal reasoning as the guiding 
political procedure; the public giving, weighing, acceptance or rejection of reasons. These also 
underpin the critical social theory of Habermas (Horster, 1992) that explains why delibera-
tive democracy is needed to prevent science and technology serving minority interests and 
how the views of citizens might be moved towards a reasoned consensus on their application 
based on sound argument and reliable evidence. Since science and technology can only know 
nature in instrumental terms, they should be constantly weighed against other knowledge 
when applied to sustainable development. Such knowledge includes critical political ecology 
that is alert to the social construction of all knowledge, supposedly neutral explanations of 
ecological reality and multiple discourses of sustainable development. Citizens can arrive at 
ecologically rational decisions provided they consider a wide range of knowledge and values 
covering what is technically possible, culturally appropriate, morally and politically just. This 
assumption underpins critical pedagogy (eco-pedagogy) in ESD (Huckle, 1996; Kahn, 2008) 
and TEfS should introduce such pedagogy and demonstrate how it can be enriched by such 
ideas as those of Castells (2008, 2011abc), Wright (2010), Gorz (1980), Harvey (2011) and 
others.
Network society, global civil society and green socialism
In network society, the public sphere or space for debate on public affairs shifts from the 
local to the global and is increasingly constructed around global communication networks. 
This space is occupied by a global civil society that has arisen due to the decreased ability of 
nationally based political systems to manage the world’s problems. It structures and channels 
citizen debates over such issues as sustainable development towards the networked state 
and consists of a variety of social interests including transnational business; world religions; 
public intellectuals; individuals and organisations promoting diverse models and discourses 
of sustainable development and global democracy. Castells (2008) recognises four different 
kinds of organisation within global civil society which overlap in their efforts as they engage 
with the pathways and logics that Wright (2010) outlines, innovate with institutions and 
shape debate and policy on sustainable development.
•	
Local civil society actors defending local interests. For instance, labour unions 
defending local jobs against outsourcing or local fishermen protesting against for-
eign-owned factory ships.
•	
Non-governmental organisations with a global frame of reference. For instance, 
Greenpeace, Oxfam or the Business Council for Sustainable Development.
•	
Social movements that aim to control the process of globalisation. For instance, 


138
John Huckle
the Zapatistas defending Mexicans against NAFTA, the anti-globalisation move-
ment.
•	
Movements seeking to shift public opinion that use the media system and hori-
zontal, autonomous networks of communication. For instance, UK Uncut pro-
test against tax avoidance, Occupy Wall Street, Adbusters.
Castells (2011bc) addressed Occupy London and analysed it in a subsequent lecture in Cam-
bridge. He regards its use of ICT and media to win wide support and introduce alternative 
ideas to a wider public as being critical elements in its success. While the mainstream media 
depicted it as marginal, unlawful and over, it experimented with participatory planning and 
deliberative democracy and was inspired by utopias including those associated with green 
socialism. Determined to make the case that bankers should pay for the crisis they had caused 
and that politicians no longer represented citizens, the worldwide Occupy movement demon-
strated that social change begins in people’s minds and develops as they build networks and 
challenge network-making power (Gessen et al., 2012).
Sustainability, critical and digital literacies
Having outlined how TEfS might explore the role of ICT in enabling an unsustainable neolib-
eral capitalism and its potential role in the transition to a more sustainable green socialism, 
I now intend to link ESD and TEfS to critical and digital literacies. Luke and Woods (2009) 
review approaches to critical literacy that might be introduced within TEfS and suggest that it 
involves engagement with the major texts, discourses and modes of information in a culture. 
Critical literacy attempts to attend to the ideological and hegemonic function of texts, and 
critical pedagogy is one means by which these are revealed. While critical literacy and peda-
gogy are underpinned by a variety of philosophical assumptions and pedagogical emphases 
that Luke and Woods survey (including those based on Habermas’ critical theories), they 
share a commitment to the use of literacy for purposes of equity, social justice and sustainabil-
ity. “They aim for nothing less than readers, writers, listeners and viewers who have a cogent, 
articulated and relevant understanding of texts, their techniques, their investments and their 
consequences, and who are able to use these understandings and capacities to act mindfully 
and justly to change their worlds” (Luke & Woods, 2009, p. 9).
Lankshear and Knobel (2008) review the different meanings of digital literacy that have 
accumulated over recent years and distinguish between technical or instrumental forms that 
list specific skills and technique (computer literacy) and critical forms that emphasise mastery 
of ideas and insist on careful evaluation of information and intelligent analysis and synthesis 
(media literacy). Critical approaches focus on the cognitive and socio-emotional aspects of 
working in digital environments where information is multimediated and the networked in-
dividual has to be skilled at deciphering complex images and sounds as well as the syntactical 
subtleties of words. They encompass the ability to understand and use information in multi-
ple forms from a variety of sources when it is presented via digital codification: blogs, video 


139
Teacher education for sustainability in network society: Combining digital and ..
games, text messages, online social network pages, discussion forums, internet memes, FAQs, 
online search results and so on. 
Unfortunately, a ‘digital divide’ is opening up between home and school.
. . . we are witnessing a widening gap between the culture of the school and the culture of 
children’s lives outside school. In their leisure time, children are encouraged to see them-
selves as active participants, navigating their way independently through complex multi-
media environments. Yet in school they are expected to submit to a pedagogic regime that 
is fundamentally premised on the testing of decontextualized skills and knowledge. By 
and large the use of information and communication technology in school signally fails 
to engage with the ways in which young people are now relating to information, and with 
the ways they choose to communicate (Buckingham, 2007, p. 178).
Digital technologies suggest a radical new way of learning (Siemens, 2004)) and the need 
to change curriculum and pedagogy (Collins & Halverson, 2009; Jouneau-Sion & Sanchez, 
2011). Pass and Creech (2008), Tella and Adu (2009) and Blewitt (2006) have reviewed the 
opportunities and challenges that ICT provides for ESD more generally, while Cifuentes, Mer-
chant and Vural (2011) have examined the role of Web 2.0 technologies in the related field 
of global citizenship education. It is my intention to maintain a focus on critical literacy and 
pedagogy, and, following Lambert and Morgan’s (2010) argument regarding ICT and geog-
raphy teaching, what is needed is not merely a ‘tech-savvy’ approach that capitalises on the 
interactivity of Web 2.0 to enliven ESD (YouTube rather than PowerPoint presentations, blogs 
rather than essays, teachers and students contributing to wikis), but an approach that sees all 
knowledge relating to sustainable development as being socially constructed and provides 
students with opportunities to reflect and to act the kind of ideas outlined in the earlier sec-
tions of this paper as mediated by digital technology. Such learning would develop sustain-
ability literacy (their ability to read the symptoms and causes of unsustainable development 
and write more sustainable futures) whilst also contributing to political literacy and the devel-
opment of identity. Clearly, this has wide implications for TEfS requiring course of initial and 
continuing professional development to apply relevant theory to the development of critical 
pedagogy that seeks both digital and sustainability literacy.
In such merging of critical sustainability and digital literacies, TEfS should follow Buck-
ingham (2009, 2012) by approaching media not as technologies but as cultural forms that 
represent the world and communicate ideas. It should acknowledge that bias is unavoidable, 
that information relating to sustainable development is inevitably shaped by discourse and 
ideology and that in network society media texts play a key role in the politics of sustain-
able development and are shaped by and in turn shape the kind of network power that Cas-
tells (2008, 2011abc) outlines. Buckingham (2008) suggests how four key concepts central to 
media education (representation, language, production and audience) can be applied to the 
analysis of websites and the key questions he uses are equally relevant to other texts com-
municated via social media. He (Buckingham, 2008) argues that media production should 
accompany media analysis as a means of developing media/digital literacy, and this may in-
volve blogging, social networking, game making, small-scale video production. The aim is for 


140
John Huckle
teachers and students to understand how the media work, how meaning is created, who has 
the power and how that power can be challenged.
Mocigemba (2008) presents three theses and anti-theses relating to podcasting and sus-
tainable development that can be applied to social media more generally (Table 1). TEfS and 
ESD linked to digital literacy should encourage teachers and students to evaluate these as 
they encounter and produce a variety of texts. Table 1 also provides a starting point for us to 
consider whether the above ideas already outlined can be put into practice.
Table 1. Web 2.0 (social media) and sustainable development (SD): Based on Mocigemba (2008)
Web 2.0 media can open up debate on SD by:
•	
Turning lecture into debate
•	
Lowering entry barriers to discourse
•	
Turning passive governance into a 
deliberative process
•	
Increasing civic engagement and political 
participation particularly amongst the 
young
•	
Tailoring messages to specific audiences 
who can receive them free of space/time/
cost constraints
•	
Expressing minority views and placing new 
issues on the agenda
•	
Encouraging active searching, selecting and 
responding (learning)
Opening the debate on SD via Web 2.0 media 
is only a theoretical possibility because:
•	
Audiences may be small or non-existent 
(but any audience worthwhile)
•	
Communication may not stimulate genuine 
dialogue (need for online leadership/
moderators)
•	
Online participation in debates on SD 
topics appeals mainly to those already 
familiar with the blogosphere
•	
Talk does not necessarily lead to action
•	
Attention slips from the public to the 
private sphere as with mobile phones
•	
People enjoy their passivity and retreat into 
privacy 
Web 2.0 media can enforce a culture and 
lifestyle of SD by:
•	
Overcoming the immunisation, ignorance 
and rejection prompted by threatening, 
moralising and patronising environmental 
communication
•	
Emphasising solutions, inducing positive 
emotions and mentioning additional 
immaterial benefits
•	
Associating SD with popular media brands 
like YouTube (‘The medium is the message’)
•	
Using user generated content to increase 
identification with sustainability values 
and overcome suspicion of manipulation/
propaganda
•	
Providing unifying narratives for groups 
sympathetic to SD, labelled cultural 
creatives or post materialists
Web 2.0 media will have little effect outside 
cyberspace because:
•	
Audience is low and messages have little 
social and cultural impact (no mass self 
communication a reality)
•	
Cultural creatives may be further divided 
by digital creatives and their diverse 
messages
•	
They will reinforce the digital divide, many 
have no access or lack media literacy
Web 2.0 is a useful tool for the existing SD 
community because:
•	
It is a way to create synergy and use 
network power to attract public attention
•	
It can reduce dependence on established 
media and journalists by bypassing, 
critiquing and correcting them (citizen 
journalists)
•	
Its use raises the reputation of the SD 
community
Web 2.0 is dangerous for the established SD 
community because:
•	
Citizen journalists may understand SD less 
well than traditional journalists
•	
Consideration of SD becomes dependent 
on media literacy and an affinity with ICT 
•	
Copyright hinders translation of traditional 
media materials dealing with SD
•	
Its use threatens the reputation of the SD 
community


141
Teacher education for sustainability in network society: Combining digital and ..
From theory to practice, YouTube in the ESD classroom
After outlining the role of social media in providing a new space for civic engagement 
and linking this to Habermas’ notion of communicative rationality, Kellner and Gooyang 
(Gooyang, 2009; Kellner & Gooyang, 2009) consider the potential and limitations of YouTube 
to empower young citizens. While YouTube is embedded in capitalist social relations (owned 
by Google) and can be considered another play-pen in the capitalist fun house or a medium 
dominated by self-expression, narcissism, silliness and entertainment, mainly used by 
relatively rich, white male English speakers, Kellner and Gooyang (2009) suggest that, linked 
to a critical media pedagogy, it offers some potential as a reservoir of true enlightenment. 
YouTube allows individuals to ‘organise and deploy novel strategies of self-education and 
social transformation’; can be seen as a ‘dialogical learning community’; and, by allowing users 
to post videos and opinions, it provides opportunities for them to exhibit personal autonomy 
and active and critical citizenship. In this way, it extends and democratises civil society.
The hopes and fears raised by Mocigemba (2008) and Kellner and Gooyang (2009) can 
be tested as part of TEfS, by examining the potential of YouTube to stimulate learning and 
communication around the central ideas outlined in this article. Do YouTube videos address 
alternative development paths for Europe, including more sustainable paths linked to socialism 
and the radical democratisation of European society? Do they address Wright’s ideas on the 
multiple pathways and logics shaping the prospects for change and Castells’ (2008, 2011abc) 
ideas about network society? Are they likely to appeal to students in classrooms, to provide 
an extended forum for debate and discussion and a rich medium for critical media pedagogy?
To begin to answer these questions, I searched for relevant videos on YouTube, selected 
nine that are listed in Table 2 and noted related statistics on how many times they had been 
viewed and how many comments and expressions of like/dislike they had attracted. 
Table 2. Nine YouTube videos relevant to debate on sustainable development in Europe (viewed and 
statistics recorded on 25/04/12)
Title
Date uploaded
Uploaded by
Viewed by
Comments
Likes/
dis-
likes
European Green 
Party spokesperson 
Phillippe Lamberts 
MEP on the Spanish 
protests
30/05/2011
European Green 
Party
58
0
2/0
Susan George – 
Green New Deal
06/09/2011
attactv
2673
1
18/1
Participatory 
budgeting comes to 
Kensington
24/10/2011
Dorablount
308
0
0/0
The story of We the 
Citizens (Citizens 
Assembly, Ireland)
09/12/2011
thecitizenVideo
79
0
1/0
Sequel to Table 2 see on p. 142.


142
John Huckle
With reference to Mocigemba’s three theses/anti-theses, we can note that, while there is rel-
evant content on YouTube, it is not attracting large audiences and there is a lack of related 
comment and debate. The video statistics facility shows the location and gender of an audi-
ence that is generally located in Europe and male. Developing any sort of unified narrative on 
sustainable development from the vast array of videos on offer requires prior knowledge of 
sustainability politics and skilled use of search terms. The ratio of likes to dislikes suggests that 
the videos are viewed by those already sympathetic to the arguments presented and by follow-
ing links to organisations that uploaded the videos, the viewer may gain access to networks 
that aid their ongoing search for political and personal identity.
Turning to Wright’s and Castells’ ideas, there is clearly a need for teachers to approach 
YouTube with these in mind as they provide relevant search terms and criteria for evaluating 
videos for classroom use. There is sufficient content on YouTube to illustrate their ideas but 
also evidence that this is as yet not a key medium for learning about and debating radical 
social change. Once selected by the teacher or the students, YouTube videos can aid the devel-
opment of political literacy and sustainability citizenship, but this will require a fair amount 
of conventional teaching and learning if the videos are to be interpreted in ways associated 
with critical media literacy.
Searching YouTube suggests that few schools are uploading videos on sustainability topics 
and that those that are uploaded mainly focus on sustainable schooling. Teachers’ concerns 
about e-safety may explain this lack of engagement, as may the relatively high level of sustain-
ability literacy needed to comprehend much of the material uploaded to YouTube. The me-
dium has potential, but as yet its significance for ESD in the lives of school students pales into 
insignificance compared with its use for entertainment and distraction from real world issues.
And the present challenge?
As I write in late April 2012, it is clear that Europe’s networked state is not working. An aus-
terity programme, which diminishes sovereignty, consigns youth to high levels of unemploy-
ment and steers Europe towards a decade of stagnation, is destroying the social solidarity on 
which the European Union depends. Some citizens continue to demand the radical democra-
tisation of Europe that would sweep away the existing neoliberal treaties of the EU, establish a 
Greek town develops 
bartering system 
without Euros
04/04/2012
LeakSource2012
15248
28
162/0
Coops can work – 
Mondragon Coop 1
01/11/2011
FreeTheWorker
278
0
1/0
Occupy Athens
06/10/2011
Redandblack540
691
3
7/1
Manuel Castells at 
Occupy London
26/11/2011
VoicingTheCity
958
0
4/0
The Icelandic 
Modern Media 
Initiative
20/05/11
corbettreport
2326
6
62/1
Sequel to Table 2.


143
Teacher education for sustainability in network society: Combining digital and ..
new framework for economic integration and political union, redistribute wealth and employ 
ecological planning to recover from capitalist crisis. This paper has argued that their argu-
ments should feature in TEfS and ESD along with those that are more reformist and conserva-
tive. The critical understanding and use of social media should become a key element of TEfS, 
but teacher educators will need to be realistic about what such media currently offer.
Acknowledgement:
This work has been developed within the framework of the ICTeESD project that has been 
funded from the European Commission (ERASMUS Multilateral Programme Virtual Cam-
pus Project No. 510212-LLP-1-2010-1-GR-ERASMUS-EVC (2010-3494). The content of the 
paper reflects the views of the authors, and the Commission cannot be held responsible for 
any use which may be made of the information contained therein.
References:
Baber, W. F., & Bartlett, R. V. (2005). Deliberative environmental politics: Democracy and 
ecological rationality. London: MIT Press.
Blewitt, J. (2006). The ecology of learning: sustainability, lifelong learning and everyday life. 
London: Earthscan.
Buckingham, D. (2007). Beyond technology: Children’s learning in the age of digital culture. 
Cambridge: Polity Press.
Buckingham, D. (2008). Defining digital literacy – what do young people need to know about 
digital media. In A. Lankshear & M. Knobel (Eds.), Digital literacies: Concepts, policies and 
practices (pp. 73–91). Oxford: Peter Lang. 
Buckingham, D. (2009). Beyond technology: Rethinking learning in an age of digital culture. 
In J. Pettersen (Ed.), Youth, media, democracy: Perceptions of new literacies (pp. 37–43). 
Dublin: Centre for Social and Educational Research.
Buckingham, D. (2012). The future of media literacy in the digital age: Some challenges for policy 
and practice. Retrieved April 28, 2012, from http://medienimpulse.at/articles/view/143 
Castells, M. (2008). The new public sphere: Global civil society, communication networks, and 
global governance. ANNALS, AAPSS [The Annals of the American Academy of Political 
and Social Science], 616, 78–93. DOI: 10.1177/0002716207311877.
Castells, M. (2011a). A network theory of power. International Journal of Communication, 5, 
773–787.
Castells, M. (2011b). Manuel Castells on alternative local economies. Retrieved April 28, 2012, 
from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1hpd3GPuDBc 
Castells, M. (2011c). Humanitas, Manuel Castells at the University of Cambridge, Lecture 3, 
YouTube. Retrieved April 28, 2012, from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hNlycKjnxTk 


144
John Huckle
Chadwick, A. (2009). Web 2.0: New challenges for the study of e-democracy in the era of 
informational exuberance. I/S: A Journal of Law and Policy for the Information Society, 
5(1), 9–41.
Cifuentes, L., Merchant, Z., & Vural, O. (2011). Web 2.0 technologies forge the way for global 
citizenship. Mustafa Kemal University Journal of Social Sciences Institute, 8(15), 295–312.
Collins, A., & Halverson, R. (2009). Rethinking education in the age of technology: The digital 
revolution and the schools. New York: Teachers College Press. 
De Santos, R., Husson, M., Katz, C., Mandel E. and others. (2009). Socialists and the capitalist 
recession. London: Resistance Books.
Ferry, J. (2011). Understanding the European Union in a cosmopolitan sense. What is civic 
participation? Paper presented at the European workshop on closing the empowerment 
gap through citizenship education, 17–19 November 2011, Warsaw, Poland, Networking 
European Citizenship Education. 
Foster, J. B., Clark, B., & York, R. (2010). The ecological rift, capitalism’s war on the earth. New 
York: Monthly Review Press.
Gessen, K., Greif, M., Leonard, S., Taylor, A., Resnick, S., Schmitt, E., et al. (2012). Occupy! 
Scenes from Occupied America. London: Verso.
Gooyang, K. (2009). The future of YouTube: Critical reflections on YouTube users’ discussion 
over its future. Retrieved April 28, 2012, from http://escholarship.org/uc/item/9tn362r2 
Gorz, A. (1980). Ecology as politics. Boston: South End Press.
Harvey, D. (2010). The enigma of capital and the crises of capitalism. London: Profile Books.
Harvey, D. (2011). David Harvey at Occupy London, YouTube. Retrieved April 28, 2012, from 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ht8W30gkVac 
Held, D. (1995). Democracy and the global order: From the modern state to cosmopolitan 
governance. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Hill, S. (2010). Models of online activism and their implications for democracy and climate 
change. Retrieved April 28, 2012, from http://www.fdsd.org/wordpress/wp-content/
uploads/Online-activism-democracy-and-climate-change.pdf 
Horster, D. (1992). Habermas: An introduction. Philadelphia: Pennbridge.
Huckle, J. (1996). Teacher education. In J. Huckle & S. Sterling (Eds.), Education for 
sustainability (pp. 105–119). London: Earthscan.
Huckle, J. (2008). Sustainable development. In J. Arthur, I. Davies & C. Hahn (Eds.), The Sage 
handbook of education for citizenship and democracy (pp. 342–354). London: Sage.
Jouneau-Sion, C., & Sanchez, E. (2011). Web 2.0 is challenging school. Retrieved April 28, 
2012, from http://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/docs/00/61/82/85/PDF/iigwe2011_Jouneau_
sanchez.pdf 
Kahn, R. (2008). From education for sustainable development to ecopedagogy: Sustaining 


145
Teacher education for sustainability in network society: Combining digital and ..
capitalism or sustaining life? Green Theory & Praxis, 4(1), 1–14. DOI: 10.3903/gtp.2008.1.2.
Kellner, D., & Gooyang, K. (2009). YouTube, critical pedagogy, and media activism: An 
articulation. Retrieved April 28, 2012, from http://pages.gseis.ucla.edu/faculty/kellner/
essays/2009_Kellner-Kim_UT_Politics%20and%20PedagogyFINAL%20April%2009.pdf 
Lambert, D., & Morgan, J. (2010). Teaching geography 11–18: A conceptual approach. 
Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Lankshear, A., & Knobel, M. (2008). Introduction. In A. Lankshear & M. Knobel (Eds.), 
Digital literacies – concepts, policies, practices (pp. 1–16). Oxford: Peter Lang.
Little, A. (1998). Post-industrial socialism: Towards a new politics of welfare. London: Routledge.
Luke, A., & Woods, A. F. (2009). Critical literacies in schools: A Primer. Voices from the 
Middle, 17(2), 9–18.
Mason, P. (2012). Why it’s kicking off everywhere: The new global revolutions. London: Verso.
Mocigemba, D. (2008). P4P, podcasting for participation: How can digital grassroots media 
support sustainable development? Retrieved April 28, 2012, from http://195.37.26.249/ijsc/
docs/artikel/02/02_mocigemba.pdf 
Morozov, E. (2011). The net delusion. New York: Public Affairs.
O’Connor, J. (1991). Socialism and ecology. Capitalism, nature, socialism, 2(3), 1–12. DOI: 
10.1080/10455752.2012.701856.
Paas, L., & Creech, H. (2008). How ICTs can support education for sustainable development: 
Current uses and trends. Paper prepared with the support of the Province of Manitoba and 
presented to Manitoba Education, Citizenship and Youth. Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
Pepper, D. (1993). Eco-socialism, from deep ecology to social justice. London: Routledge.
Shutt, H. (2010). Beyond the profits system: Possibilities for a post-capitalist era. London: Zed 
Books.
Siemens, G. (2004). Connectivism: A learning theory for the digital age. Retrieved April 
28, 
2012, 
from 
http://www.ingedewaard.net/papers/connectivism/2005_siemens_
ALearningTheoryForTheDigitalAge.pdf 
Tapscott, D., & Williams, A. D. (2008). Wikinomics: How mass collaboration changes lives. 
London: Atlantic Books.
Tapscott, D., & Williams, A. D. (2010). MacroWikinomics: Rebooting business and the world. 
London: Atlantic Books.
Tella, A., & Adu, E. O. (2009). Information and communication technology (ICT) and 
curriculum development: The challenges for education for sustainable development. 
Indian Journal of Science and Technology, 2(3), 55–59. 
Williamson, A. (2011). Driving civic participation through social media. Paper presented at the 
European workshop on perspectives of Web 2.0 for citizenship education in Europe, Brno, 
Czech Republic, 7–9 April 2011, Brno, Czech Republic, Networking European Citizenship 


146
John Huckle
Education.
Wright, E. O. (2010). Envisioning real utopias. London: Verso.
Correspondence:
John Huckle is an ESD consultant who formerly taught at the University of York, De Montfort 
and South Bank universities. Email: john@huckle.org.uk. He can be contacted via his website 
at: http://john.huckle.org.uk
