    Details
JP Akinyemi – McCombs School of Business – University of Texas at Austin –  AOM CTO August 2024
TEXT AND IMAGE CONTEXTUAL INCONGRUENCIES IN CLIMATE MISINFORMATION 
ON SOCIAL MEDIA:  A NEURO-IS APPROACH
    Summary
RQ: How does contextual congruence in posts of paired climate image and text 
caption affect sharing and liking on Social Media (SM), and how do digital 
interventions reduce or amplify these impacts?
• 3 experiments (total of 833 participants) revealed that incongruence affects social 
media engagement differently for accurate versus inaccurate posts.
• H1, H2, and H4 are partially supported, and H3 is supported. -> Contextual 
incongruence's effects vary based on the presence of other incongruencies.
• Highlight the role of congruence in the spread of misinformation and its importance 
for effective interventions in IS misinformation research.
Study 3 – Eye-Tracking
       PS2: Leveraging Gen-AI 
Image Creation as Intervention
Studies 1 & 2
PS1: Congruent, yet 
Stylistically Different
Acknowledgments
v Dr. Sirkka Jarvenpaa (Dissertation Chair and advisor)
v Dr. Thushara Gunda (Dissertation Committee member)
v Jacqueline McKeown and Mark Wimby (McCombs Behavioral Lab)
v LDRD Program at Sandia National Laboratories
• Climate Misinformation, misleading environmental information on digital platforms 
that contradicts scientific evidence, poses a threat to climate actions (IPCC, 2022).
• Congruence is pervasive on SMs, where anyone can reframe images with captions.
• A contextual congruent post is one in which the social and cultural meanings an 
individual associates with an indexical image are described or implied in the text.
• Dual-process information processing theory (DPT) (Evans, 2019) is used to explain 
how individuals use Type 1 or 2 to engage with congruent or incongruent posts.
• Experiments measured SM Engagement (DV), Visual Attention (with eye-tracking), 
Perceived Accuracy, Novelty, and Contextual Congruence.
Above post is accurate with congruent image at a regular view. 
Two posts below, similar but with top and satellite-view images.
Above is a congruent & incongruent version of an inaccurate 
post. Below are examples of interventions.
Above is a heatmap of gazes for an accurate text and congruent 
post. Below is a participant’s visual attention on a post.
H1: Contextual congruence influences 
perceived accuracy. 
H2: Contextual incongruence increases sharing 
of inaccurate posts and likes for accurate posts.
H3: Interventions reduce sharing of inaccurate 
posts but decrease it for accurate posts. 
H4: Eye-tracking metrics will support theorized 
cognitive processing of H1, H2, and H3.
Images, even if congruent with text, can create 
different meanings based on stylistic properties 
(i.e. viewpoint). In planned study 1, expect top-
view images to increase multi-contextuality, 
while satellite images may reduce it.
Planned study 2 proposes using generative AI 
(i.e., DALL-E) to create images for posts (given 
text captions)  individuals to consider multi-
contextuality when creating images for posts; 
which could reduce engagement with 
inaccurate or incongruent posts.
• Multi-contextuality (Henfridsson & Lindgren, 2005) theorized as a driver of Type 1 or 
Type 2 information processing in congruent or incongruent accurate/inaccurate posts.
Sandia National Laboratories is a multimission laboratory managed and operated by National Technology & Engineering Solutions of Sandia, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Honeywell International Inc., for the U.S. Department of Energy’s National Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-NA0003525. SAND2024-10828C 
SAND2024-10828C
