ORIGINAL ARTICLE
https://doi.org/10.1007/s41471-025-00215-8
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
Speaking of Sustainability... The Triple Bottom Line in
Firm- and User-Generated Content
Jonah Blits
· Narine Yegoryan
· Timo Mandler
·
Alexa B. Burmester
Received: 30 September 2024 / Accepted: 30 May 2025 / Published online: 25 July 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract Sustainability has become a critical concern of many societies worldwide.
The need for a more sustainable mode of producing and consuming goods and ser-
vices while balancing related environmental, social, and economic consequences
(i.e., the triple bottom line) is evident. Although research offers insights into many
aspects of this necessary transformation, little is known about the extent to which
ﬁrms and consumers stress environmental, social, and economic sustainability in
their communication. This research addresses these questions by conceptualizing
the interplay between sustainability-related ﬁrm-generated and user-generated con-
tent as a signaling phenomenon. In addition, the authors develop a custom dictionary
that enables researchers and practitioners to identify and analyze sustainability-re-
lated textual data. An illustrative application based on major data sources (corporate
websites, Amazon, and YouTube) indicates signiﬁcant divergence in how ﬁrms and
consumers communicate about sustainability. Building on this ﬁrst conceptual and
empirical foray into sustainability-related ﬁrm-generated and user-generated con-
tent, this research outlines open research questions and potential use cases for the
provided analytical tool.
Jonah Blits ·  Alexa B. Burmester
Kühne Logistics University, Großer Grasbrook 17, 20457 Hamburg, Germany
E-Mail: alexa.burmester@klu.org
Jonah Blits
E-Mail: jonah.blits@klu.org
Narine Yegoryan
Institute of Marketing, Humboldt University Berlin, Spandauer Str. 1, 10178 Berlin, Germany
E-Mail: narine.yegoryan@hu-berlin.de
Timo Mandler
Department of Marketing, TBS Business School, 20 Boulevard Lascrosses, 31000 Toulouse, France
E-Mail: t.mandler@tbs-education.fr
K


558
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
Keywords Sustainability · Triple bottom line · Firm-generated content · User-
generated content · Dictionary · Text analysis · Amazon · YouTube
1 Introduction
Sustainability—deﬁned as the production and consumption of “goods and services
that meet basic needs and quality of life without jeopardizing the needs of future
generations” (OECD 2002, p. 16)—has become a critical concern of many societies
worldwide. Severe environmental, social, and economic ramiﬁcations of the current
modus operandi of the global economy are evident. Mass production and consump-
tion signiﬁcantly contribute to global carbon emissions, accelerating climate change
(Ivanova et al. 2016); eroding trust in institutions, such as governmental bodies, chal-
lenges efforts to uphold public support of important social causes (OECD 2017); and
digitalization and the emergence of the gig economy are transforming many indus-
tries, threatening both ﬁrms’ long-term viability and citizens’ economic participation
(World Economic Forum 2023).
Many governments, ﬁrms, and consumers have recognized the signs of the times
and have put sustainability on their agendas, business plans, and shopping lists (UN-
FCCC 2015; European Commission 2021; Nielsen 2024). The propagation of the
United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals, the European Union’s Corporate
Sustainability Reporting Directive, and the increased scrutiny from ﬁnancial analysts
underscores the intensiﬁed collective efforts to transform current business practices
(European Union 2022; Morgan Stanley 2024; PwC 2021; United Nations 2025). As
a result, ﬁrms have stronger incentives than ever to adopt sustainable business prac-
tices that balance the environmental, social, and economic consequences of their
operations (Lloret 2016), a notion encapsulated by the term “triple bottom line”
(Elkington 1999).
The transformation toward sustainability has become increasingly visible in the
marketplace, with a growing number of brands promoting their sustainability efforts
and positioning their products as desirable and sustainable choices. A prominent
example is Unilever, which has made substantial strategic adjustments to integrate
sustainability into its core business operations. Its ‘Sustainable Living Plan’ aims to
reduce its environmental impact while generating social beneﬁts (Unilever 2021).
Similarly, Patagonia has long been recognized as a leader in sustainability, advo-
cating responsible supply chains, circular economy principles, and environmental
activism (McKinsey and Company 2023).
To promote their sustainability efforts, ﬁrms rely on ﬁrm-generated content
(FGC), i.e., ﬁrm-initiated marketing communication disseminated through ofﬁcial
communication channels (Kumar et al. 2016; Lacka et al. 2022). However, con-
sumers also form their attitudes toward brands and products based on information
and opinions shared by other consumers online, i.e., through user-generated content
(UGC) (Tirunillai and Tellis 2012; Tang et al. 2014).
Despite the central role of communication in informing consumers and inﬂuenc-
ing their purchase behavior (Hoyer and MacInnis 2007), insights into how ﬁrms
and consumers discuss sustainability are scarce. Current literature primarily focuses
K


Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
559
on investor-facing channels, such as corporate reports (e.g., Bingler et al. 2022,
Maibaum et al. 2024, Vaupel et al. 2023). Studies focusing on UGC remain scarce
and fragmented. For example, Dunn and Harness (2019) examine how consumers
perceive sustainability-related UGC; Han et al. (2018) and Leung (2009) investigate
what consumer attributes drive content creation and dissemination; and Elgaaied-
Gambier and Mandler (2021) explore sustainability-related memes as expressions
of eco-anxiety and a related coping mechanism.
We contribute to the nascent literature at the intersection of sustainability and
FGC/UGC in two major ways. First, we propose a conceptual model of the in-
terplay between sustainability-related FGC and UGC. Adopting a signaling theory
perspective (Erdem and Swait 1998, 2004), we describe how ﬁrms and consumers
engage in a continuous exchange of signals and emphasize the interactive nature of
sustainability-related FGC and UGC. Building on this conceptualization, we outline
a set of open research questions. Second, we develop a custom dictionary that en-
ables researchers and practitioners to identify and analyze corporate communication
and consumer narratives about environmental, social, and economic sustainability.1
We demonstrate the dictionary’s usefulness through an illustrative application based
on data from corporate websites, a leading online marketplace (Amazon), and a ma-
jor social media platform (YouTube). The results reveal a major divergence in how
ﬁrms and consumers communicate about sustainability.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. The next section discusses
our conceptual model, followed by related research questions. Then, we present
the development and application of the custom dictionary, including ﬁrst insights.
We conclude by discussing the implications of this work, including an overview of
potential use cases.
2 Sustainability-Related FGC and UGC as a Signaling Phenomenon
The conceptual framework that guides our investigation is grounded in signaling
theory (Erdem and Swait 1998, 2004). Signaling theory, rooted in information eco-
nomics, posits that markets are characterized by imperfect and asymmetric informa-
tion (Spence 1974). Consequently, consumers look for signals that convey indirect
information about speciﬁc market offerings (Erdem and Swait 2004). For example,
high prices, strong advertising, wide geographical reach, and generous warranties
may signal superior quality (Boulding and Kirmani 1993; Kihlstrom and Riordan
1984; Mandler et al. 2021; Spence 1974). The process of identifying and interpret-
ing these signals is a key part of the customer journey, as consumers engage with
different sources of information at different decision-making stages, particularly as
they progress from initial awareness to deeper evaluation (Tueanrat et al. 2021).
In this context, FGC and UGC serve as important signals that inform potential
customers about the sustainability attributes of a brand and its products. On the one
hand, ﬁrms might actively signal their stance on sustainability in their consumer-
1 We provide our dictionary, collected FGC and UGC data, and the R code for its deployment in a public
GitHub repository: https://github.com/nyegoryan/replication-speaking-of-sustainability.
K


560
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
facing communication (e.g., on their ofﬁcial websites) to strengthen corresponding
brand associations and/or highlight speciﬁc sustainable features when presenting
their products to consumers (e.g., on online marketplaces like Amazon). On the
other hand, ﬁrms may act opportunistically by portraying themselves as sustainable
without actually operating sustainably. Signaling theory provides a useful lens for
understanding both phenomena (Connelly et al. 2011). It helps explain how compa-
nies communicate their sustainability efforts, particularly in light of the inherent risk
of misleading signals (e.g., “greenwashing”). As Connelly et al. (2011) point out, sig-
nals can be either authentic—i.e., accurately reﬂecting a ﬁrm’s genuine actions—or
opportunistic—i.e., intended to mislead consumers for competitive advantage. In
the context of sustainability, this distinction is crucial: Authentic signals represent
real efforts toward sustainable practices (e.g., third-party certiﬁcations, transpar-
ent reporting); whereas opportunistic signals involve false sustainability claims for
marketing purposes (e.g., vague or unveriﬁable environmental claims, selective dis-
closure of positive impacts while concealing harmful practices).
In terms of UGC, consumers also rely on signals from other consumers, such as
product reviews from peers (e.g., Amazon customers) or experts (e.g., inﬂuencers on
YouTube) (Goldsmith and Horowitz 2006). Consumers tend to perceive such user-
provided information as more credible than corporate signals (Cheong and Mor-
rison 2008; Dunn and Harness 2019), despite the prevalence of fake reviews (He
et al. 2022). It is also well established that online reviews have a signiﬁcant im-
pact on measures of ﬁrm performance (e.g., Chevalier and Mayzlin 2006; Vana and
Lambrecht 2021). This aligns with ﬁndings from customer journey research, which
emphasize that evaluating claims is not a one-time event but a process requiring mul-
tiple interactions across different touchpoints (Tueanrat et al. 2021). Consumers may
initially rely on FGC for broad sustainability positioning but often seek veriﬁcation
through UGC before making purchase decisions.
In summary, the cost of signaling plays a key role in determining authenticity for
both, ﬁrms and consumers. When the cost of sending a signal is low (e.g., vague
sustainability claims that are difﬁcult to verify for consumers), the risk of misleading
signals increases. Thus, ﬁrms often adopt labels, certiﬁcates, and detailed product
descriptions to reinforce the credibility of their sustainability messaging. However,
even these signals vary in terms of credence—some aspects can be validated by con-
sumers (e.g., ingredient lists), while others remain unveriﬁable, requiring consumers
to trust the ﬁrm or external certiﬁers. Consequently, from the consumer’s perspec-
tive, evaluating signals comes at a cost, particularly in terms of time and effort.
Assessing the credibility of a claim requires research, comparison, and a deeper un-
derstanding of sustainability standards. Just like ﬁrms use costly signals to enhance
their reputation, consumers engage in effortful evaluations as a way of signaling
their own informed decision-making. In both cases, the cost associated with sig-
naling serves to enhance the sender’s perceived authenticity—whether it is the ﬁrm
demonstrating its commitment to sustainability or the consumer demonstrating con-
scious consumption.
Figure 1 depicts our conceptual model, showing the interactive signaling process
between ﬁrms and consumers in the context of sustainability-related FGC and UGC.
It emphasizes the dynamic feedback loop between ﬁrms and consumers, showing
K


Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
561
Fig. 1
Sustainability-related FGC and UGC as a signaling phenomenon.
Note: * Signals can also be targeted toward other stakeholders, such as investors and regulators
how both parties alternately act as signalers and receivers, thereby creating a contin-
uous ﬂow of information that inﬂuences perceptions and decisions. This perspective
guides our following investigation of sustainability-related FGC and UGC. At the
heart of the model lies the concept of the signal—the primary mechanism through
which sustainability-related information is communicated. Signals are encoded and
sent by ﬁrms and consumers and then received and decoded by their respective audi-
ences. The effectiveness of this process depends not only on the nature of the signal
itself but also on certain characteristics of the ﬁrm and consumer involved. By con-
sidering both ﬁrm-generated and user-generated signals, our framework highlights
the dynamic exchange of sustainability-related information between ﬁrms and con-
sumers, emphasizing the importance of credibility, observability, and interpretation
in the signaling process.
2.1 Firm-Generated Content as a Signal
2.1.1 Firms Send Signals to Consumers
The sustainability-related signals ﬁrms send to consumers can take different forms
based on their characteristics, shaping how they are perceived and interpreted by
consumers. First, signals may be mandatory or voluntary, depending on whether
they are driven by regulatory requirements or by a ﬁrm’s commitment to sustain-
ability beyond legal obligations (Rao and Ursu 2025). Mandatory signals arise from
K


562
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
governmental regulations or industry standards that require a ﬁrm to disclose certain
environmental or social impact metrics (Balasubramanian and Cole 2002; Chris-
tensen et al. 2021). Examples include legally required carbon emissions reporting,
compliance with labor laws, and adherence to minimum sustainability certiﬁca-
tions (Christensen et al. 2021). In contrast, voluntary signals—such as publishing
detailed sustainability reports following agreed standards (Friske et al. 2022), in-
troducing carbon-neutral product lines (Stokes and Turri 2013), or participating in
independent certiﬁcation programs (Darnall et al. 2018; Christensen et al. 2021;
Rao and Ursu 2025)—are often seen as indicators of a ﬁrm’s genuine dedication to
sustainability (Brown et al. 2009; Friske et al. 2022). Second, ﬁrm-generated sig-
nals can be authentic or deceptive, inﬂuencing consumer trust and brand reputation.
Authentic signals align with a ﬁrm’s actual sustainability practices, backed by ver-
iﬁable data and transparent communication (Berrone et al. 2017; Christensen et al.
2021). Companies that genuinely integrate sustainability into their core business
strategies—such as using responsibly sourced materials, reducing waste across sup-
ply chains, or actively engaging in social responsibility initiatives—are more likely
to be perceived as credible (Bhattacharya and Sen 2004). Conversely, deceptive sig-
nals involve exaggerating, misrepresenting, or selectively disclosing sustainability-
related information (Delmas and Burbano 2011; Berrone et al. 2017). When con-
sumers detect deception, it can severely damage trust (e.g., Chen and Chang 2013),
leading to skepticism toward not only the speciﬁc claim but also the ﬁrm’s brand
image as a whole (e.g., Parguel et al. 2011).
Third, ﬁrm signals vary in focus, being either product- or brand-related (Boulding
and Kirmani 1993). Product-related signals provide sustainability information at the
level of individual products or services, such as the use of organic ingredients, carbon
footprint labels, biodegradable packaging, and fair-trade certiﬁcations (Parguel et al.
2011; Atkinson and Rosenthal 2014). These signals help consumers make informed
choices by offering tangible, product-speciﬁc sustainability attributes (Atkinson and
Rosenthal 2014). In contrast, brand-related signals communicate a ﬁrm’s general
commitment to sustainability (Bhattacharya and Sen 2004). These can include public
pledges to achieve net-zero emissions, investments in renewable energy, or company-
wide policies on ethical labor practices.
Together, these signal characteristics deﬁne how ﬁrms communicate their sus-
tainability efforts, how consumers interpret them, and ultimately, how ﬁrms shape
their credibility in the sustainability landscape.
Consumers Observe and Interpret These Signals
Apart from the characteristics
of the signal itself, ﬁrm-speciﬁc factors can also inﬂuence the efﬁcacy of the sig-
naling process. First, brand strength may affect how consumers interpret signals.
Established brands with a strong market presence are more likely to have their
sustainability messages taken seriously, as their reputation serves as an implicit
endorsement of credibility (Erdem and Swait 1998, 2004). Second, a ﬁrm’s sustain-
ability history affects how its signals are received. Signals from ﬁrms with a long-
standing commitment to sustainability are more likely to be perceived as genuine,
wheras those from ﬁrms with a weaker track record may face consumer skepticism.
K


Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
563
Finally, the observability and interpretation of signals likely depend on two con-
sumer-speciﬁc characteristics. First, consumers with a strong sustainability orien-
tation are more likely to actively seek and prioritize sustainability-related informa-
tion (White et al. 2019). Second, consumers’ information-seeking behavior plays
a role in how they validate and compare signals before making purchasing decisions
(Bartschat et al. 2022; Tueanrat et al. 2021). Because expertise is positively related to
information processing diligence (Alba and Hutchinson 1987), we expect those who
engage deeply with the topic of sustainability to be more capable of differentiating
between credible and non-credible ﬁrm-generated signals.
2.2 User-Generated Content as a Signal
Consumers Send Signals to Other Consumers and Firms
Consumers also act as
signalers. They send sustainability-related signals, such as product reviews, to other
consumers as well as to ﬁrms (Goldsmith and Horowitz 2006; Siering et al. 2018).
These consumer-generated signals vary in observability and information richness,
two critical characteristics inﬂuencing their effectiveness (Connelly et al. 2011).
Observability refers to the extent to which other consumers and ﬁrms can detect and
assess a given signal. Highly observable signals, such as publicly shared product
reviews, can reach a broader audience and generate a stronger impact, compared to
signals that are less publicly visible (Connelly et al. 2011).
Information richness determines how much detail, context, and substantiating
evidence a consumer-generated signal contains. Richer signals, such as in-depth
product reviews that analyze and compare speciﬁc sustainability claims, provide
valuable insights that help other consumers and ﬁrms make informed decisions
(Filieri 2014; Siering et al. 2018). Conversely, vague or ambiguous signals, such as
one-line reviews that simply state “eco-friendly” without supporting details, offer
limited interpretability and may be less persuasive (Siering et al. 2018).
Consequently, high observability and information richness make consumer-gen-
erated signals particularly impactful. When UGC is widely visible and well-substan-
tiated, it becomes more difﬁcult for ﬁrms to ignore, as other consumers may rely
on it in their decision-making. Hence, ﬁrms must carefully monitor and respond to
these signals.
Other Consumers and Firms Observe and Interpret These Signals
The quality
and credibility of consumer-generated signals depend on two factors. First, con-
sumers with a deeper understanding of sustainability practices can generate high-
quality signals that inform others about genuine and misleading claims. Their con-
tributions shape how other consumers and ﬁrms interpret sustainability-related in-
formation (Jiménez and Mendoza 2013; Thomas et al. 2019). Second, a veriﬁed
purchase history strengthens the credibility of consumer-generated signals. Reviews
and feedback from veriﬁed buyers tend to be trusted more by fellow consumers and
ﬁrms seeking authentic insights (He et al. 2020).
Both ﬁrms and other consumers observe and interpret these consumer-generated
signals. Especially ﬁrms rely on their internal capabilities to detect, process, and
respond to such signals. Two ﬁrm-speciﬁc factors effectively inﬂuence their ability
K


564
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
to engage with UGC. First, ﬁrms with a strong sustainability orientation are more
likely to pay attention to relevant consumer-generated signals and integrate this in-
formation into their strategies (Eccles et al. 2014). Second, ﬁrms with advanced data
analytics capabilities can monitor and analyze UGC more effectively, helping them
improve sustainability-related strategies and tactics (Kunz et al. 2016). For example,
if a ﬁrm detects a growing number of consumers questioning the authenticity of its
sustainability claims, it can adjust its messaging, increase transparency, or align the
underlying sustainability practices with consumer expectations.
2.3 Next Steps in Sustainability-Related UGC and FGC Research
Our conceptual model underscores the theoretical relevance of sustainability-re-
lated communication between ﬁrms and consumers. While certain aspects, such as
participating in independent certiﬁcation programs (Darnall et al. 2018), are well
understood in terms of their effects, many questions remain empirically underex-
plored. Table 1 provides an overview of open research questions that build upon
the prior conceptualization. The topics address the main effects of sustainability-
related FGC and UGC on a range of outcomes of interest, as well as the attributes
that may moderate their impact. Additionally, measuring and comparing the two are
important ﬁelds for empirical research.
For example, future research could explore the impact of different triple bottom
line dimensions of FGC on the relevance of sustainability in UGC and how ﬁrms can
convey their messages more effectively. To this end, studies could compare online
communication patterns of products marketed as sustainable versus those that do
not determine what communication content and style help managers to inﬂuence
consumer perceptions and behaviors. We also lack an understanding of the extent to
which the detected sustainability-related communication in UGC reﬂects consumers’
sincere interest in sustainability. Do they really care about sustainability? And does
their online chatter translate into actual (sustainable) purchase behavior? Establishing
the (non-)existence of a connection between UGC, personal relevance, and actual
consumption would be an important and insightful extension of this research. Finally,
the proliferation of generative artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is transforming how people
search for information, including brand- and product-related information. It would
be valuable to investigate whether AI-generated summaries of reviews accurately
reﬂect sustainability-related information and to what extent consumers rely on this
new feature.
Addressing these open empirical research questions will enhance our understand-
ing of the dynamics between FGC and UGC and their roles in shaping corporate
communication and consumer behavior regarding sustainability. However, such re-
search requires adequate tools to identify sustainability-related content.
Various methods for the analysis of UGC exist (see Baier et al. 2025 in this
issue for a review) and some have been applied to the context of sustainability,
such as topic modeling for the detection and categorization of sustainability-related
communication (Székely and vom Brocke 2017; Maibaum et al. 2024), transformer-
based models for the analysis of sustainability discourse in corporate contexts (e.g.,
ClimateBERT; Bingler et al. 2022), and Large Language Models (LLMs) for per-
K


Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
565
Table 1
Open empirical research questions about sustainability-related FGC/UGC
Topic
Research Questions
Firm-generated content as a signal
FGC to
consumer
What impact does FGC have on sustainability-related UGC?
How important are the different triple-bottom line dimensions in FGC?
Are all triple-bottom line dimensions of similar importance for consumers?
What roles do consumers’ sustainability orientation and information-seeking behav-
ior play?
How do brand strength and a ﬁrm’s sustainability history inﬂuence signaling efﬁ-
cacy?
FGC attributes
How do signal attributes (mandatory vs. voluntary nature, authentic vs. deceptive
natures) inﬂuence signaling efﬁcacy?
How does sustainable brand- vs. product-level FGC differ in its impact?
User-generated content as a signal
UGC to
consumer
How does user-generated content inﬂuence consumer awareness and behavior toward
sustainable products and practices?
Which social media platforms are most effective for disseminating UGC related to
sustainability?
How does UGC about sustainable vs. non-sustainable products/brands differ?
How does consumer sustainability expertise impact the creation of sustainability-
related UGC?
Do visible/veriﬁed purchase disclaimers matter to other consumers?
How do observability and information richness of UGC about sustainability inﬂuence
consumer responses (e.g., sustainability perceptions, willingness to purchase)?
UGC to ﬁrm
How can ﬁrms leverage UGC to enhance their sustainability initiatives?
What role do data analytics capabilities play in this context?
Why do consumers create UGC about the sustainability aspects of products/services?
Are there differences in UGC about the different dimensions of the triple bottom
line?
How do ﬁrms react to sustainability-related UGC, and what role does their sustain-
ability orientation play?
UGC as
a measurement
How can sustainability and the triple-bottom line dimensions be measured in FGC
and UGC?
How much does UGC reﬂect the true importance of and interest in sustainability for
the consumers?
How accurate are AI-generated summaries of reviews and sustainability-related dis-
cussions, and to what extent do consumers rely on this new feature of major plat-
forms like Amazon?
Difference in ﬁrm-generated and user-generated content
FGC and UGC
comparison
How do FGC and UGC differ in terms of communicating the different dimensions of
the triple bottom line?
What are the underlying causes of differences in FGC and UGC?
What are the key differences in the impact of FGC and UGC on consumers’ sustain-
ability-related perceptions and attitudes?
How do FGC and UGC complement each other in promoting sustainable practices?
What are the potential synergies and conﬂicts between FGC and UGC in sustainabil-
ity communication?
K


566
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
forming zero-shot classiﬁcations without predeﬁned keyword lists (Maibaum et al.
2024).
Particularly dictionary-based techniques have been widely used in sustainability
research (e.g., Vaupel et al. 2023; Pencle and Malaescu 2016; Baier et al. 2020).
Compared to more recent approaches that involve a black-box problem, dictionary-
based text analyses are based on a clearly deﬁned set of keywords that reﬂect
the conceptual domain of the target construct. However, existing dictionaries are
(1) limited to corporate contexts, such that the included keywords reﬂect corporate
reporting terminology rather than language consumers would use, and (2) rarely
account for all three dimensions of the triple bottom line. Therefore, this research
offers a new, specialized dictionary that enables researchers and practitioners to
measure environmental, social, and economic sustainability in both FGC and UGC.
3 Dictionary Development and Application
In the following section, we report the development of a specialized dictionary tai-
lored to the concept of sustainability. It intended to be broadly applicable across
diverse contexts and product categories. To demonstrate its versatility, we present
an illustrative application to unstructured text data from four distinct product cate-
gories, collected from multiple FGC sources (corporate websites, Amazon product
descriptions) and UGC sources (YouTube videos, Amazon customer reviews).
3.1 Identiﬁcation of Keywords
In line with the triple bottom line, we consider three dimensions of sustainability: en-
vironmental sustainability–the responsible use of resources in products and services
by minimizing material and energy consumption, reducing waste and emissions,
and prioritizing recyclability and eco-friendly practices–, social sustainability–the
alignment of products and services with ethical consumption principles that pro-
mote a fair and inclusive society, such as respecting human rights, promoting well-
being, and enhancing product accessibility and safety–, and economic sustainabil-
ity–the long-term economic value that products and services offer through their
durability, efﬁciency, ease of maintenance, repairability, and affordability (Good-
land 1995; Elkington 1999; Dyllick and Hockerts 2002). For each dimension, we
draw on the sub-themes and factors identiﬁed by Menigstu et al. (2024) to generate
an initial corpus of keywords. Table 2 provides an overview of these dimensions,
and serves as the basis for keyword development. We also include a “global” cate-
gory for sustainability-related terms (e.g., “sustainable,” “sustainability”) that refer
to overarching sustainability claims that are not speciﬁc to any one dimension. This
approach ensures that general sustainability statements are not lost or misclassiﬁed
under more narrowly deﬁned categories. This initial corpus of keywords underwent
multiple rounds of discussion and reﬁnement, resulting in a list of 105 keywords.
Next, we enriched the pool of keywords with additional synonyms and related
terms by providing the LLMs Gemini 1.5 and ChatGPT 3.5 with the deﬁnition of the
triple bottom line and detailed descriptions of the factors within each sustainability
K


Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
567
Table 2
Sustainability framework (adapted from Menigstu et al. 2024)
Dimension
Sub-theme
Factors
Environmental End-of-life manage-
ment
Recyclability, reusability, disassemblability, disposability
Resources
Material consumption, energy consumption/efﬁciency, packag-
ing material use, recycled material use
Waste and emis-
sions
Waste, greenhouse gas emissions
General
Eco-friendliness, green marketing
Social
Functionality and
usability
Ergonomics, accessibility
Social well-being
Product safety, health and well-being, ethical responsibility
Economic
Costs
Material costs, operating costs, energy costs, maintenance costs
Financial gain
Product price
Manufacturability
Modularity, upgradeability
Quality and reliabil-
ity
Durability/lifespan, product quality, maintainability, reliability,
repairability
Global
–
Sustainable, sustainability
dimension (see Web Appendix A). After removing duplicates, terms already present
in the initial corpus, and terms deemed unrelated to sustainability, we included
32 additional keywords. Next, we aggregated keywords with identical word stems
but varying endings through manual truncation (e.g., “environmental” and “environ-
mentally” were consolidated under “environmental”). This resulted in a corpus of
110 keywords.
As we want to capture both positive and negative discussions of sustainability,
most of our keywords can appear in a range of contexts. For example, including
“*toxic*” captures any token containing the substring “toxic,” thus encompassing
both “nontoxic” and “toxic.” Where such coverage was not feasible, we explicitly
included paired positive and negative terms (e.g., “high-quality” vs. “low-quality”)
to ensure balanced representation.
3.2 Validation of Keywords
The dictionary was then reﬁned and validated in two steps. First, we surveyed
a sample of 250 U.S. consumers via Proliﬁc (mean age= 38.9; age range= 19–82;
57.2% female) to assess the clarity of all keywords, as ambiguous keywords could
generate hits that are unrelated to the construct of interest, thereby increasing Type I
errors. Each respondent rated a random subset of 10 keywords in terms of clarity
of meaning. Based on these ratings, we excluded 9 out of 110 keywords that were
perceived as highly ambiguous (i.e., falling within the top 10th percentile).2
2 Two keywords related to economic sustainability (“futureproof”, “transparent price”), two related to
social sustainability (“barrier free”, “fairtrade”), and ﬁve related to environmental sustainability (“carbon
neutral”, “energy star”, “green marketing”, “greenwash”, “low carbon”) were excluded.
K


568
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
Second, we recruited two domain experts who independently rated each key-
word’s domain relevance on a 7-point scale (1= “Not linked at all” to 7= “Very
closely linked”). The ratings’ correlation of 0.72 indicated high levels of agreement
but also revealed 17 keywords that both experts ﬂagged as unrelated (below scale
midpoint).3 Consequently, we removed these keywords, resulting in a corpus of
84 validated keywords.
Finally, we considered the possibility of alternative spellings by also including
joint and hyphenated variants (e.g., “bio-degradable,” “biodegradable,” and “bio
degradable”), which led to the addition of 100 keywords. Table A1 in Appendix A
presents the ﬁnal dictionary.
3.3 Illustrative Application
Next, we applied our dictionary to FGC and UGC for four distinct product cate-
gories—fragrances, scented candles, wireless headphones, and multi-purpose clean-
ers—chosen to ensure heterogeneity in consumption motives (hedonic vs. utilitar-
ian), visibility of consumption (private vs. public), durability, consumer involvement,
and price. For each category, we selected the best-selling products on Amazon (ex-
cluding “Featured Products” to reduce bias from paid promotions). While this ap-
plication illustrates how text analytics can be used for both FGC and UGC, the
generalizability of the ﬁndings is limited to the sampled products.
For each product, we obtained FGC and UGC from three sources: corporate
websites, the leading online marketplace Amazon, and the leading video platform
YouTube. For FGC, we focused on content aimed at consumers—mission and sus-
tainability statements, if available, from the brands’ corporate websites (see Web
Appendix B for an example). We focused solely on on-site textual information,
excluding external materials like annual ESG reports, which primarily target other
stakeholders, such as investors. Additionally, we collected each product’s Amazon
description, including text from the “Product Name,” product attribute ﬁelds, and
sections such as “About this item,” “From the manufacturer,” “From the brand,”
“Product information,” “Product description,” “Sustainability features,” and “Impor-
tant information,” as well as any tabular comparisons (see Web Appendix B for an
example). We also manually transcribed text from images to ensure completeness.
For UGC, we collected customer reviews on Amazon and inﬂuencer reviews on
YouTube. Using Outscraper, we scraped 100 “Top Reviews” (Amazon’s default sort)
per product. After excluding non-English reviews, we retained 2029 reviews across
the selected products. We then searched for the most-watched English-language
YouTube product reviews (by exact product name) and identiﬁed 67 videos, for
which we obtained the transcripts using Video Summarizer GPT. We used otter.ai
to transcribe two review videos for which transcripts were not directly accessible.
3 Of these, 15 related to economic sustainability (“budget friendly”, “cost of energy”, “costs of energy”,
“cost to maintain”, “costs to maintain”, “cost of material”, “costs of material”, “material cost”, “materials
cost”, “cost of operating”, “costs of operating”, “operating cost”, “overpriced”, “pricey”, “sturdy”), and
two to social sustainability (“childproof”, “secure”).
K


Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
569
An overview of the selected product categories, products, and the related data we
collected from different sources is provided in Web Appendix C.
We performed several pre-processing steps for the text analysis. First, we used
ChatGPT 3.5 to spell-check4 all UGC from Amazon and YouTube, minimizing the
impact of misspellings on our results. Next, we removed case sensitivity, numbers,
punctuation, symbols, separators (except for hyphens), and common English stop
words, retaining only meaningful content (Gentzkow et al. 2019). We then tokenized
the text, compounded tokens to preserve multi-token keywords from our dictionary,
and applied a simple bag-of-words approach to measure keyword frequency using
the R package Quanteda (Benoit et al. 2018). All collected data, the dictionary,
and the R code are available in a public GitHub repository (https://github.com/
nyegoryan/replication-speaking-of-sustainability).
We observe clear differences in the prominence of sustainability-related signals
across FGC and UGC channels. Table 3 summarizes these differences by reporting
the absolute keyword frequencies and the ratios of each sustainability dimension rel-
ative to both the total number of tokens in the text and the total number of sustainabil-
ity-related keywords. Overall, we ﬁnd only a small fraction of sustainability signals
in both FGC and UGC, but they appear more often in FGC (4.31% on corporate web-
sites and 0.94% in Amazon product descriptions) than in UGC (0.14% on YouTube
and 0.33% in Amazon reviews). This pattern also holds within individual product
categories (see Appendix B, Fig. B1). We also ﬁnd a wider range of sustainability-
related terms in FGC, especially on corporate websites, which mention 47 unique
keywords (e.g., “sustainab*,” “recycle*,” “environmental*,” “emission*,” “health*,”
“recyclab*”). In contrast, Amazon product descriptions include only 19 distinct sus-
tainability-related keywords, most frequently “long-lasting,” “health*,” “sustainab*,”
and “high-quality” (see Appendix B, Fig. B2).
On corporate websites, environmental sustainability dominates, accounting for
59.28% of all sustainability-related keywords, which may reﬂect ﬁrms’ attempts to
appeal to a broad range of stakeholders, including investors. This trend holds across
product categories except for multi-purpose cleaners, where social sustainability
nearly equals environmental sustainability (see Appendix B, Fig. B1). Economic
sustainability is least mentioned (3.84%). However, the emphasis shifts in Amazon
product descriptions—FGC aimed directly at consumers—where social and eco-
nomic sustainability each account for 33.33% of all sustainability-related keywords.
Still, the prominence of speciﬁc dimensions varies by product category: Social sus-
tainability leads in multi-purpose cleaners (with environmental sustainability close
behind), whereas economic sustainability is most prominent in scented candles and
wireless headphones (see Appendix B, Fig. B2). Firms may view environmental
sustainability as a desirable brand association (which is established in corporate
communication afar from the point-of-sale) but not a key product attribute that can
4 We implemented this through OpenAI’s API with temperature 0 for more deterministic responses. To
ensure that the text is not altered, we prompted ChatGPT to only check for and correct misspellings using
the following prompt “You are a professional copy editor. Please only correct spelling mistakes in the
following text: [sentence]”.
K


570
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
Table 3
Absolute and relative frequency of sustainability-related keywords across sources
FGC: Website
FGC: Amazon
UGC: Youtube
UGC: Amazon
Abs.
freq
Rel. freq.
wrt all
tokens
Rel. freq.
within
keywords
Abs.
freq
Rel. freq.
wrt all
tokens
Rel. freq.
within
keywords
Abs.
freq
Rel. freq.
wrt all
tokens
Rel. freq.
within
keywords
Abs.
freq
Rel. freq.
wrt all
tokens
Rel. freq.
within
keywords
Environmental
278
2.56%
59.28%
19
0.20%
21.11%
7
0.02%
15.91%
20
0.03%
8.55%
Social
69
0.63%
14.71%
30
0.31%
33.33%
17
0.05%
38.64%
31
0.04%
13.25%
Economic
18
0.17%
3.84%
30
0.31%
33.33%
20
0.06%
45.45%
181
0.25%
77.35%
Global
104
0.96%
22.17%
11
0.12%
12.22%
0
0.00%
0.00%
2
0.00%
0.85%
Total no. of
sustainability
keywords
469
4.31%
100.00%
90
0.94%
100.00%
44
0.14%
100.0%
234
0.33%
100.00%
Total no. of
tokens
10,869
100.00%
9,537
100.00%
31,814
100.00%
71,239
100.00%
K


Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
571
convince consumers to purchase (relative to economic aspects, such as durability,
product quality, and repairability).
In UGC, economic sustainability dominates: It accounts for 77.35% of sustain-
ability-related keywords in Amazon reviews and 45.45% in YouTube reviews. Envi-
ronmental sustainability is least discussed (8.55% in Amazon reviews and 15.91%
in YouTube reviews), indicating a clear contrast with ﬁrm-generated content. Social
sustainability ranks second (13.25% in Amazon reviews and 38.64% in YouTube
reviews). However, this result should be interpreted with caution, as the limited
focus of end consumers’ communication on environmental sustainability does not
necessarily imply a lack of concern. Amazon reviews also contain more frequent and
varied sustainability-related terms (234 total mentions at 0.33% of content) com-
pared to YouTube (44 mentions at 0.14% of content; see Table 3). Overall, 30 dis-
tinct sustainability-related terms appear in Amazon reviews (e.g., “long-lasting”,
“durab*”, “reliab*”, “toxic”) versus 17 in YouTube reviews (e.g., “long-lasting”,
“toxic”, “safety”).
Notably, product category differences persist. While economic sustainability gen-
erally dominates in Amazon reviews, multi-purpose cleaners prompt a more balanced
discussion across economic, social, and environmental dimensions. In YouTube re-
views for these products, environmental and social sustainability dominate, likely
reﬂecting the marketing of multi-purpose cleaners as eco-friendly and safe for con-
sumers—factors that heighten the perceived importance of these dimensions (see
Appendix B, Fig. B1).
As a robustness check, we also applied GPT models—particularly GPT-4—for
zero-shot classiﬁcation, exploiting their capability to classify text without labeled
training data. While labeled datasets exist for corporate reports, they remain scarce
for UGC (e.g., customer reviews and social media posts). Although the zero-shot
classiﬁer identiﬁed more sustainability signals overall, the patterns matched our
dictionary-based results (see Appendix B, Table B1).
3.4 Discussion and Limitations
This illustrative application showcases how text analysis can be employed to ex-
amine sustainability discourse in both FGC and UGC. Using data from corporate
websites, Amazon product descriptions, inﬂuencer YouTube reviews, and consumer
reviews on Amazon, we shed initial light on how environmental, social, and eco-
nomic sustainability—the triple bottom line dimensions—are communicated across
these channels.
All dimensions of the triple bottom line are present across channels, underscoring
the risk of overlooking key sustainability facets by focusing on a narrower view of
sustainability, e.g., exclusively on the environmental aspect. We also observe incon-
sistencies in FGC: Firms may not adopt a fully integrated sustainability approach
and instead adjust their emphasis across different channels. Finally, both ﬁrms and
consumers appear to prioritize concrete economic and communal (social) beneﬁts
over more abstract environmental considerations in purchase-related contexts, as
reﬂected in product descriptions and reviews.
K


572
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
Several limitations warrant caution. First, we analyzed a small set of product
categories and products, which limits generalizability. Second, like any dictionary-
based approach, our method faces the challenge of ensuring complete coverage
of relevant keywords. Because we aimed for versatility, we kept our dictionary at
a broad level of abstraction. Future research might extend it with context-speciﬁc
keywords (e.g., ingredients tied to sustainability). Third, dictionary-based methods
also involve the risk of not fully accounting for novel or evolving terminology. Thus,
our ﬁndings are likely conservative.
Finally, GPT models for zero-shot classiﬁcation show promise; however, they still
function as “black boxes,” limiting transparency. Without prelabeled data from con-
sumer-facing channels, it is not possible to fully validate this approach. Moreover,
zero-shot performance depends on the underlying model’s training, which may intro-
duce bias or inaccuracies if particular topics or demographics are underrepresented
in the training data.
4 Managerial Implications
Our ﬁndings provide ﬁrst valuable insights into how sustainability is communicated
across different channels, highlighting notable differences between FGC and UGC.
The empirical application further demonstrates how our specialized dictionary can
uncover such differences, enabling ﬁrms to better track and understand their sus-
tainability narrative.
Table 4 presents practical use cases, providing a clear roadmap for ﬁrms to effec-
tively incorporate both FGC and UGC sources to inform critical aspects of sustain-
ability management—from tracking consumer perceptions and detecting sustainabil-
ity credence to forecasting market trends and managing brand reputation. By sys-
tematically comparing these two types of data, businesses can identify discrepancies
between their sustainability claims (FGC) and consumer feedback (UGC)—potential
gaps in credibility that highlight where communication strategies may need reﬁne-
ment. In addition, ﬁrms can assess the effectiveness of their sustainability initiatives
and enhance transparency. Managers can also harness UGC to identify salient sus-
tainability themes, such as locally sourced goods or zero-waste practices, and align
these insights with the ﬁrm’s broader sustainability agenda to create more impactful
messaging for their target audience.
Overall, an integrated framework that combines insights from FGC and UGC
equips ﬁrms to make data-driven decisions that foster trust and deepen stakeholder
engagement. By leveraging these complementary types of data, ﬁrms can reﬁne their
marketing communication, better align their sustainability efforts with consumer
values, and strengthen their position as responsible brands. Embracing both FGC
and UGC as complementary content in a structured, analytical manner ultimately
provides ﬁrms with a pathway to greater authenticity, accountability, and strategic
foresight in the evolving sustainability landscape.
K


Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
573
Table 4
FGC and UGC use cases for corporate sustainability insights
Categories
FGC
UGC
Consumer perception
& brand reputation
Compare UGC sentiment with FGC
(e.g., sustainability claims on web-
sites or in product descriptions) to
detect and address misinformation or
inconsistencies before they damage
brand credibility.
Analyze brand-speciﬁc consumer
sentiment in UGC to assess public
perception of the ﬁrm’s sustainabil-
ity efforts.
Sustainability product
credibility
Compare product-speciﬁc UGC
with ﬁrm-generated sustainability
information to assess alignment
with stakeholder expectations and
identify and address potential gaps,
ambiguities, or overstatement.
Analyze sustainability-related,
product-speciﬁc UGC to assess
real-world credibility of sustain-
ability statements (discrepancies
between a ﬁrm’s sustainability
claims and customer experiences).
Product evaluation &
improvement
Analyze and compare ﬁrms’ prod-
uct descriptions and sustainability
information with UGC to ensure
accuracy and identify opportunities
for product improvement.
Analyze UGC to extract product-
speciﬁc feedback (e.g., durability,
recyclability) based on real-world
consumer experience.
Marketing communi-
cation strategy
Compare these insights with a ﬁrm’s
current sustainability strategies
to craft more targeted messages
that resonate more effectively with
consumers.
Analyze UGC to identify sustain-
ability aspects that matter most
to consumers (e.g., cruelty-free,
locally made, or zero-waste).
Market trend
monitoring
Align emerging sustainability trends
with the ﬁrm’s product portfolio to
guide strategic adjustments and drive
innovation.
Analyze UGC to identify evolving
consumer preferences for sustain-
able products (e.g., plant-based
diets, or zero-waste packaging).
5 Conclusion
This paper examines how ﬁrms and consumers communicate about sustainability
by investigating the interplay between FGC and UGC, adopting a triple bottom line
perspective. We propose and illustrate a conceptual model grounded in signaling
theory, showing how ﬁrms and consumers alternately function as both senders and
receivers of sustainability-related information. Building on this model, we outline
a comprehensive set of open research questions (see Table 1) that emphasize the
need for further empirical exploration of how sustainability-oriented FGC and UGC
are conveyed and interpreted in modern marketplaces.
To support such inquiries, we introduce a specialized dictionary that captures the
triple bottom line across various contexts, and allows researchers and practitioners
to systematically identify and analyze sustainability signals in both FGC and UGC.
Our illustrative application, based on data from corporate websites, Amazon, and
YouTube, provides initial insights into notable differences in how ﬁrms and con-
sumers address sustainability. It also highlights the importance of adopting a broad,
triple bottom line perspective, as narrower deﬁnitions risk overlooking essential sus-
tainability themes. In particular, the economic dimension of sustainability—found
to be the most prominent topic in UGC in our illustrative application—should not
be dismissed, as doing so may result in underestimating consumer interest.
K


574
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
With our dictionary and a summary of practical use cases, ﬁrms are better
equipped to make data-driven decisions and reﬁne their sustainability strategies and
communication. Researchers can likewise tailor or expand the dictionary for special-
ized investigations, from product-level inquiries to broader industry-wide analyses
of sustainability communication.
Overall, our ﬁndings demonstrate the importance of continued research into the
framing, interpretation, and impact of sustainability messages across diverse commu-
nication channels. A deeper understanding of these processes can help organizations
more closely align their practices with stakeholder values and empower consumers
to make informed choices. The proposed conceptual model, the specialized dic-
tionary, and related empirical insights aim to foster more data-driven research on
sustainability communication and promote increased transparency and alignment
among ﬁrms, consumers, and other stakeholders.
K


Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
575
6 Appendix
6.1 Appendix A
Table A1
Dictionary
Keyword
Alternative spelling
Environmental Dimension
Bio degradab*
(bio-degradab*, biodegradab*)
Carbon emission*
(carbon-emission*, carbonemission*)
Carbon footprint
(carbon-footprint, carbonfootprint)
Carbon re*
(carbon-re*, carbonre*)
Carbon zero
(carbon-zero, carbonzero)
Chemical free
(chemical-free, chemicalfree)
Climate
–
co2
–
Disassembl*
–
Disposab*
–
Easy to dispose
(easy-to-dispose, easytodispose)
Eco conscious*
(eco-conscious*, ecoconscious*)
Eco friendly*
(eco-friendly*, ecofriendly*)
Electricity consumption
(electricity-consumption, electricityconsumption)
Electricty use*
(electricty-use*, electrictyuse*)
Emission*
–
Energy consumption
(energy-consumption, energyconsumption)
Energy efﬁcien*
(energy-efﬁcien*, energyefﬁcien*)
Energy saving*
(energy-saving*, energysaving*)
Energy use*
(energy-use*, energyuse*)
Environment protecting
(environment-protecting, environmentprotecting)
Environmental*
–
Excessive packag*
(excessive-packag*, excessivepackag*)
Fewer chemicals
(fewer-chemicals, fewerchemicals)
Fewer waste
(fewer-waste, fewerwaste)
Ghg
–
Green product*
(green-product*, greenproduct*)
Greenhouse gas*
(greenhouse-gas*, greenhousegas*)
Less chemical*
(less-chemical*, lesschemical*)
Less waste
(less-waste, lesswaste)
Low waste
(low-waste, lowwaste)
Minimal packag*
(minimal-packag*, minimalpackag*)
Multi-use
–
Plastic packag*
(plastic-packag*, plasticpackag*)
Power consumption
(power-consumption, powerconsumption)
Re-purposable
–
Recyclab*
–
Recyclable packag*
(recyclable-packag*, recyclablepackag*)
K


576
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
Table A1 (Continued)
Keyword
Alternative spelling
Recycle*
–
Recycled material*
(recycled-material*, recycledmaterial*)
Recycled packag*
(recycled-packag*, recycledpackag*)
Refurb*
–
Renewable energ*
(renewable-energ*, renewableenerg*)
Repurposable
–
Resource efﬁcien*
(resource-efﬁcien*, resourceefﬁcien*)
Reusab*
–
Keyword
(Alternative spelling)
Reuse
–
Saves energy
(saves-energy, savesenergy)
Second hand
(second-hand, secondhand)
Single use
(single-use, singleuse)
Throwaway
–
Waste reduc*
(waste-reduc*, wastereduc*)
Zero carbon
(zero-carbon, zerocarbon)
Zero waste
(zero-waste, zerowaste)
Social Dimension
*ethic*
–
*harmful chemical*
(*harmful-chemical*, *harmfulchemical*)
*hazard*
–
*toxic*
–
Accessib*
–
Ergonomic*
–
Health*
–
Non proﬁt
(non-proﬁt, nonproﬁt)
Safe to operate
(safe-to-operate, safetooperate)
Safe to use
(safe-to-use, safetouse)
Safety
–
Well being
(well-being, wellbeing)
Economic Dimension
Built to last
(built-to-last, builttolast)
Durab*
–
Energy cost*
(energy-cost*, energycost*)
Good value
(good-value, goodvalue)
High-quality
–
Life-span
(lifespan)
Long lasting
(long-lasting, longlasting)
Low-quality
–
Maintain*
–
Maintenance
–
Maintenance cost*
(maintenance-cost*, maintenancecost*)
Modular*
–
K


Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
577
Table A1 (Continued)
Keyword
Alternative spelling
Price transparency
(price-transparency, pricetransparency)
Reliab*
–
Repair*
–
Upgradeab*
–
Value for money
(value-for-money, valueformoney)
Global Dimension
Sustainab*
–
The asterisk (*) is a truncation symbol to capture multiple word variations
6.2 Appendix B
In the following appendix, we present additional ﬁndings from our illustrative ap-
plication (Section 3.3) and from the robustness check using zero-shot classiﬁcation.
Fig. B1 compares the relative frequency of each sustainability dimension with re-
spect to the total number of tokens in text across different product categories. In this
ﬁgure, the black bar indicates the overall measure (aggregated across all sustainabil-
ity dimensions), while the colored boxes represent dimension-speciﬁc measures.
Fig. B2 displays a word cloud of the most frequent dictionary keywords drawn
from four content sources—FGC (corporate websites and Amazon product descrip-
tions) and UGC (inﬂuencer YouTube videos and Amazon consumer reviews). The
four sustainability dimensions (environmental, social, economic, and global) are dis-
tinguished by color. Only keywords appearing more than three times are included,
and their size corresponds to their absolute frequency across product categories.
As a robustness check, we used GPT-4 in a zero-shot classiﬁcation setting. Specif-
ically, we prompted GPT-4 three separate times—once each for environmental,
social, and economic sustainability—by supplying the deﬁnition of the relevant sus-
tainability dimension (see Section 3.1). For efﬁciency, each of the three prompts was
run on a batch of 20 sentences. Table B1 presents the comparative results between
the zero-shot classiﬁer and our dictionary-based approach. In this table, we report
the relative frequency of identiﬁed sustainability-related signals for each dimension
with respect to (i) all meaningful tokens in the text (excluding stop words, punctu-
ation, etc.) and (ii) all identiﬁed sustainability-related signals. For consistency, we
recalculated the second measure in our dictionary-based approach to exclude the
global dimension, since it was not included in the zero-shot classiﬁcation.
6.2.1 Prompt
You are a text classiﬁer classifying ﬁrm- and user-generated content in being related
or unrelated to environmental sustainability for a research paper, based on Triple
Bottom Line (TBL) deﬁnition of sustainability. Sustainability is deﬁned as meeting
the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to
meet their own needs.
K


578
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
Note: Relative frequencies are computed by dividing the total number of sustainability keywords by number of 
tokens in text for a specific product category and source. 
Fig. B1
Relative frequency of sustainability dimension in each product category.
Note: Relative frequencies are computed by dividing the total number of sustainability keywords by num-
ber of tokens in text for a speciﬁc product category and source
[For environmental sustainability prompt]
Environmental Sustainability refers
to the responsible use of resources in products and services by minimizing material
and energy consumption, reducing waste and emissions, and prioritizing recycla-
bility and eco-friendly practices. Identify whether environmental sustainability is
mentioned in each sentence in a:
[For social sustainability prompt]
Social Sustainability refers to products and
services’ alignment with ethical consumption principles that promote a fair and
inclusive society, such as respecting human rights, promoting well-being, and en-
hancing product accessibility and safety. Identify whether social sustainability is
mentioned in each sentence in a:
K


Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
579
Fig. B2
Frequency of unique terms in FGC and UGC across different channels
Table B1
Comparison of zero-shot and dictionary-based approaches
Dictionary-based
Zero-shot
Rel. freq. wrt all
tokens
Rel. freq. within
keywords
Rel. freq. wrt all
tokens
Rel. freq. within
keywords
FGC: Website
Environmental
2.56%
76.16%
3.69%
44.85%
Social
0.63%
18.90%
2.70%
32.77%
Economic
0.17%
4.93%
1.84%
22.37%
Total
3.36%
100.00%
8.23%
100.00%
FGC: Amazon
Environmental
0.20%
24.05%
0.72%
28.16%
Social
0.31%
37.97%
0.65%
25.31%
Economic
0.31%
37.97%
1.20%
46.53%
Total
0.82%
100.00%
2.57%
100.00%
UGC: YouTube
Environmental
0.02%
15.91%
0,09%
7.45%
Social
0.05%
38.64%
0,14%
12.23%
Economic
0.06%
45.45%
0,95%
80.32%
Total
0.13%
100.00%
1,18%
100.00%
UGC: Amazon
Environmental
0.03%
8.62%
0,18%
6.07%
Social
0.04%
13.36%
0,18%
6.12%
Economic
0.25%
78.02%
2,60%
87.80%
Total
0.32%
100.00%
2,96%
100.00%
K


580
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
[For economic sustainability prompt]
Economic Sustainability refers to the eco-
nomic long-term value that products and services offer through their durability,
efﬁciency, ease of maintenance, repairability, and affordability. Identify whether
economic sustainability is mentioned in each sentence in a:
a) positive way, b) negative way, c) neither (if unrelated to). Format your response
as follows: 1. [a, b, or c], 2. [a, b, or c], etc.
Classify each of the following sentences according to the given instructions:
 1. [sentence]
 2. [sentence]
 ...
 20. [sentence]
Supplementary Information The online version of this article (https://doi.org/10.1007/s41471-025-
00215-8) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
Funding Funding statement No funding was received to assist with the preparation of this manuscript.
Availability of data and material The datasets generated and/or analyzed during the current study, the
developed dictionary, and the R code used for analysis are available in a public GitHub repository: https://
github.com/nyegoryan/replication-speaking-of-sustainability, licensed under the Creative Commons At-
tribution 4.0 International License.
Conﬂict of interest J. Blits, N. Yegoryan, T. Mandler and A.B. Burmester declare that they have no
competing interests.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.
0/.
References
Alba, Joseph W., and J. Wesley Hutchinson. 1987. Dimensions of consumer expertise. Journal of Con-
sumer Research 13(4):411–454. https://doi.org/10.1086/209080.
Atkinson, Lucy, and Sonny Rosenthal. 2014. Signaling the green sell: the inﬂuence of eco-label source,
argument speciﬁcity, and product involvement on consumer trust. Journal of Advertising 43:33–45.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00913367.2013.834803.
Baier, Daniel, Reinhold Decker, and Yana Asenova. 2025. Collecting and analyzing user-generated content
for decision support in marketing management: an overview of methods and use cases. Schmalenbach
Journal of Business Research https://doi.org/10.1007/s41471-025-00208-7.
Baier, Philipp, Marc Berninger, and Florian Kiesel. 2020. Environmental, social and governance reporting
in annual reports: a textual analysis. Financial Markets, Institutions & Instruments 29:93–118. https://
doi.org/10.1111/fmii.12132.
Balasubramanian, Siva K., and Catherine Cole. 2002. Consumers’ search and use of nutrition informa-
tion: the challenge and promise of the nutrition labeling and education act. Journal of Marketing
66(3):112–127. https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkg.66.3.112.18502.
Bartschat, Maria, Gerrit Cziehso, and Thorsten Hennig-Thurau. 2022. Searching for word of mouth in the
digital age: determinants of consumers’ uses of face-to-face information, Internet opinion sites, and
K


Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
581
social media. Journal of Business Research 141:393–409. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2021.11.
035.
Benoit, Kenneth, Kohei Watanabe, Wang Haiyan, Paul Nulty, Adam Obeng, Stefan Müller, and Akitaka
Matsuo. 2018. Quanteda: an R package for the quantitative analysis of textual data. Journal of Open
Source Software 3(30):774. https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.00774.
Berrone, Pascual, Andrea Fosfuri, and Liliana Gelabert. 2017. Does greenwashing pay off? Understanding
the relationship between environmental actions and environmental legitimacy. Journal of Business
Ethics 144:363–379. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-015-2816-9.
Bhattacharya, C.B., and S. Sen. 2004. Doing better at doing good: when, why, and how consumers respond
to corporate social initiatives. California Management Review 47(1):9–24. https://doi.org/10.2307/
41166284.
Bingler, Julia Anna, Mathias Kraus, Markus Leippold, and Nicolas Webersinke. 2022. Cheap talk and
cherry-picking: what climateBert has to say on corporate climate risk disclosures. Finance Research
Letters 47(Part B):102776. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2022.102776.
Boulding, William, and Amna Kirmani. 1993. A consumer-side experimental examination of signaling
theory: do consumers perceive warranties as signals of quality? Journal of Consumer Research
20(1):111–123. https://doi.org/10.1086/209337.
Brown, Halina Szejnwald, Martin De Jong, and David Levy. 2009. Building Institutions Based on In-
formation Disclosure: Lessons from GRI’s Sustainability Reporting. Journal of Cleaner Production
17:571–580. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2008.12.009.
Chen, Yu -Shan , and Ching-Hsun Chang. 2013. Greenwash and green trust: the mediation effects of green
consumer confusion and green perceived risk. Journal of Business Ethics 114(3):489–500. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10551-012-1360-0.
Cheong, Hyuk Jun, and Margaret A. Morrison. 2008. Consumers’ reliance on product information and
recommendations found in UGC. Journal of Interactive Advertising 8(2):38–49. https://doi.org/10.
1080/15252019.2008.10722141.
Chevalier, Judith A., and Dina Mayzlin. 2006. The effect of word of mouth on sales: Online book reviews.
Journal of Marketing Research 43(3):345–354. https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkr.43.3.345.
Christensen, Hans B., Luzi Hail, and Christian Leuz. 2021. Mandatory CSR and sustainability reporting:
economic analysis and literature review. Review of Accounting Studies 26:1176–1248. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11142-021-09609-5.
Connelly, Brian L., S. Trevis Certo, R. Duane Ireland, and Christopher R. Reutzel. 2011. Signaling
theory: a review and assessment. Journal of Management 37(1):39–67. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0149206310388419.
Darnall, Nicole, Hyunjung Ji, and Diego Vázquez-Brust. 2018. Third party certiﬁcation, sponsorship and
consumers’ ecolabel use. Journal of Business Ethics 150:953–969. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-
016-3138-2.
Delmas, Magali A., and Vanessa Cuerel Burbano. 2011. The drivers of greenwashing. California Manage-
ment Review 54(1):64–87. https://doi.org/10.1525/cmr.2011.54.1.64.
Dunn, Katherine, and David Harness. 2019. Whose voice is heard? The inﬂuence of user-generated versus
company-generated content on consumer skepticism towards CSR. Journal of Marketing Manage-
ment 35(9):886–915. https://doi.org/10.1080/0267257X.2019.1605401.
Dyllick, Thomas, and Kai Hockerts. 2002. Beyond the business case for corporate sustainability. Business
Strategy and the Environment 11:130–141. https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.323.
Eccles, Robert G., Ioannis Ioannou, and George Serafeim. 2014. The impact of corporate sustainability on
organizational processes and performance. Management Science 60(11):2835–2857. https://doi.org/
10.1287/mnsc.2014.1984.
Elgaaied-Gambier, Leila, and Timo Mandler. 2021. Me trying to talk about sustainability: exploring the
psychological and social implications of environmental threats through user-generated content. Eco-
logical Economics 187:1–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2021.107089.
Elkington, John. 1999. Cannibals with forks: the triple bottom line of 21st century business. Capstone.
https://doi.org/10.1002/tqem.3310080106.
Erdem, Tülin, and Joffre Swait. 1998. Brand equity as a signaling phenomenon. Journal of Consumer
Psychology 7(2):131–157. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327663jcp0702_02.
Erdem, Tülin, and Joffre Swait. 2004. Brand credibility, brand consideration, and choice. Journal of Con-
sumer Research 31(1):191–198. https://doi.org/10.1086/383434.
European Commission. 2021. European green deal: delivering on our targets. Amt für Veröffentlichungen
der Europäischen Union. https://data.europe.eu/doi/10.2775/373022. Accessed 26 Sept 2024.
K


582
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
European Union. 2022. Directive (EU) 2022/2464 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
14 December 2022. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/-TXT/?uri=CELEX:32022L2464.
Accessed 5 Mar 2025.
Filieri, Raffaele. 2014. What makes online reviews helpful? A diagnosticity-adoption framework to explain
informational and normative inﬂuences in e-WOM. Journal of Business Research 68(6):1261–1270.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2014.11.006.
Friske, Wesley, Seth A. Hoelscher, and Atanas Nikolov. 2022. The impact of voluntary sustainability re-
porting on ﬁrm value: insights from signaling theory. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science
51:372–392. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747-022-00879-2.
Gentzkow, Matthew, Bryan Kelly, and Matt Taddy. 2019. Text as Data. Journal of Economic Literature
57(3):535–574. https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.20181020.
Goldsmith, Ronald E., and David Horowitz. 2006. Measuring motivations for online opinion seeking.
Journal of Interactive Advertising 6(2):2–14. https://doi.org/10.1080/15252019.2006.10722114.
Goodland, Robert. 1995. The concept of environmental sustainability. Annual Review of Ecology and Sys-
tematics 26:1–24. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.es.26.110195.000245.
Han, Wei, Scott McCabe, Yi Wang, and Alain Yee Loong Chong. 2018. Evaluating user-generated content
in social media: an effective approach to encouraging greater pro-environmental behavior in tourism?
Journal of Sustainable Tourism 26(4):600–614. https://doi.org/10.1080/09669582.2017.1372442.
He, Jiaxiu, Xin Wang Shane, Mark B. Vandenbosch, and Barrie R. Nault. 2020. Revealed preference in
Online reviews: purchase veriﬁcation in the tablet market. Decision Support Systems 132:113281.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2020.113281.
He, Sherry, Brett Hollenbeck, and Davide Proserpio. 2022. The market for fake reviews. Marketing Science
41(5):896–921. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3664992.
Hoyer, Wayne D., and Deborah J. MacInnis. 2007. Consumer behavior. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Ivanova, Diana, Konstantin Stadler, Kjartan Steen-Olsen, Richard Wood, Vita Gibran, Arnold Tukker, and
Edgar G. Hertwich. 2016. Environmental impact assessment of household consumption. Journal of
Industrial Ecology 20:526–536. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12371.
Jiménez, Fernando R., and Norma A. Mendoza. 2013. Too popular to ignore: the inﬂuence of online re-
views on purchase intentions of search and experience products. Journal of Interactive Marketing
27(3):226–235. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intmar.2013.04.004.
Kihlstrom, Richard E., and Michael H. Riordan. 1984. Advertising as a signal. Journal of Political Econ-
omy 92(3):427–450. https://doi.org/10.1086/261235.
Kumar, Ashish, Ram Bezawada, Rishika Rishika, Ramkumar Janakiraman, and P.K. Kannan. 2016. From
social to sale: the effects of ﬁrm-generated content in social media on customer behavior. Journal of
Marketing 80(1):7–25.
Kunz, Werner H., Lerzan Aksoy, Yakov Bart, Kristina Heinonen, Sertan Kabadayi, Francisco Villaroel
Ordenes, Marianna Sigala, David Diaz, and Babis Theodoulidis. 2016. Customer engagement in
a big data world. Journal of Services Marketing 31(2):161–171. https://doi.org/10.1108/JSM-10-
2016-0352.
Lacka, Ewelina, D. Eric Boyd, Gbenga Ibikunle, and P.K. Kannan. 2022. Measuring the real-time stock
market impact of ﬁrm-generated content. Journal of Marketing 86(5):58–78. https://doi.org/10.1177/
00222429211042848.
Leung, Louis. 2009. User-generated content on the Internet: an examination of gratiﬁcations, civic en-
gagement and psychological empowerment. New Media & Society 11:1327–1347. https://doi.org/10.
1177/1461444809341264.
Lloret, Aantonio. 2016. Modeling corporate sustainability strategy. Journal of Business Research
69:418–425. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2015.06.047.
Maibaum, Frederik, Johannes Kriebel, and Johann Nils Foege. 2024. Selecting textual analysis tools to
classify Sustainability information in corporate reporting. Decision Support Systems 183:114269.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2024.114269.
Mandler, Timo, Fabian Bartsch, and C. Min Han. 2021. Brand credibility and marketplace global-
ization: the role of perceived brand globalness and Localness. Journal of International Business
52:1559–1590. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41267-020-00312-2.
McKinsey & Company. 2023. Patagonia shows how turning a proﬁt doesn’t have to cost the Earth. McK-
insey & Company. https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/agriculture/our-insights/patagonia-shows-
how-turning-a-proﬁt-doesnt-have-to-cost-the-earth. Accessed 28 Feb 2025.
Mengistu, Azemeraw Tadesse, Marcos Dieste, Roberto Panizzolo, and Stefano Biazzo. 2024. Sustainable
product design factors: a comprehensive analysis. Journal of Cleaner Production 463:142260. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2024.142260.
K


Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
583
Nielsen. 2024. Mid-year consumer outlook: guide to 2025. https://nielseniq.com/global/en/insights/report/
2024/mid-year-consumer-outlook-guide-to-2025/. Accessed 26 Sept 2024.
OECD. 2002. Towards sustainable household consumption? Trends and policies in OECD countries. Paris:
OECD Publishing.
OECD. 2017. Trust and public policy: how better governance can help rebuild public trust. OECD public
governance reviews. Paris: OECD Publishing.
Parguel, Béatrice, Florence Benoît-Moreau, and Fabrice Larceneux. 2011. How sustainability ratings might
deter “Greenwashing”: a closer look at ethical corporate communication. Journal of Business Ethics
102:15–28. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-011-0901-2.
Pencle, Nadra, and Irina M˘al˘aescu. 2016. What’s in the words? Development and validation of a multidi-
mensional dictionary for CSR and application using prospectuses. Journal of Emerging Technologies
in Accounting 13:109–127. https://doi.org/10.2308/jeta-51615.
PwC. 2021. The economic realities of ESG. https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/services/audit-assurance/
corporate-reporting/esg-investor-survey.html. Accessed 4 Mar 2025.
Rao, Anita, and Raluca Ursu. 2025. The impact of voluntary labeling. Marketing Science https://doi.org/
10.1287/mksc.2023.0273.
Servaes, Henri, and Ane Tamayo. 2012. The impact of corporate social responsibility on ﬁrm value: the
role of customer awareness. Management Science 59(5):1045–1061. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.
1120.1630.
Siering, Michael, Jan Muntermann, and Balaji Rajagopalan. 2018. Explaining and predicting online review
helpfulness: the role of content and reviewer-related signals. Decision Support Systems 108:1–12.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2018.01.004.
Spence, Andrew Michael. 1974. Market signaling: information transfer in hiring and related screening
processes. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Stanley, Morgan. 2024. Individual investors’ interest in sustainability is on the rise. https://www.
morganstanley.com/ideas/sustainable-investing-on-the-rise. Accessed 5 Mar 2025.
Stokes, Amy, and Anna M. Turri. 2013. Consumer perceptions of carbon labeling in print advertising:
Hype or effective communication strategy? Journal of Marketing Communications 21(4):300–315.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13527266.2012.762420.
Székely, Nadine, and Jan Vom Brocke. 2017. What can we learn from corporate sustainability reporting?
Deriving propositions for research and practice from over 9,500 corporatesustainability reports pub-
lished between 1999 and 2015 using topic modelling technique. Public Library of Science (PLoS
ONE) 12(4):e174807. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0174807.
Tang, Tanya, Eric Fang, and Feng Wang. 2014. Is neutral really neutral? The effects of neutral user-gen-
erated content on product sales. Journal of Marketing 78(4):41–58. https://doi.org/10.1509/jm.13.
0301.
Thomas, Marc-Julian, Bernd W. Wirtz, and Jan C. Weyerer. 2019. Determinants of online review credi-
bility and its impact on consumers’ purchase intention. Journal of Electronic Commerce Research
20(1):1–21.
Tirunillai, Seshadri, and Gerard J. Tellis. 2012. Does chatter really matter? Dynamics of user-gener-
ated content and stock performance. Marketing Science 31(2):198–215. https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.
1110.0682.
Tueanrat, Yanika, Savvas Papagiannidis, and Eleftherios Alamanos. 2021. Going on a journey: A review of
the customer journey literature. Journal of Business Research 125:336–353. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jbusres.2020.12.028.
Unilever. 2021. The Unilever sustainable living plan: progress report. Unilever. https://www.unilever.
com/ﬁles/92ui5egz/production/16cb778e4d31b81509dc
593700159f1f5c863ab.pdf.
Accessed 28
Feb 2025.
United Nations. 2025. The 17 goals. https://sdgs.un.org/goals. Accessed 5 Mar 2025.
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). 2015. Paris agreement. https://
unfccc.int/sites/default/ﬁles/english_paris_agreement.pdf. Accessed 26 Sept 2024.
Vana, Prasad, and Anja Lambrecht. 2021. The effect of individual online reviews on purchase likelihood.
Marketing Science 40(4):708–730.
Vaupel, Mario, David Bendig, Denise Fischer-Kreer, and Malte Brettel. 2023. The role of share repurchases
for ﬁrms’ social and environmental sustainability. Journal of Business Ethics 183(2):401–428. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10551-022-05076-3.
White, Katherine, Habib Rishad, and David J. Hardisty. 2019. How to SHIFT consumer behaviors to be
more sustainable: a literature review and guiding framework. Journal of Marketing 83(3):22–49.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0022242919825649.
K


584
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research (2025) 77:557–584
World Economic Forum. 2023. Future of jobs report, insight report, May 2023. https://www.weforum.org/
reports/the-future-of-jobs-report-2023/. Accessed 26 Sept 2024.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional afﬁliations.
K
