ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 14 December 2020
doi: 10.3389/fcomm.2020.601177
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
1
December 2020 | Volume 5 | Article 601177
Edited by:
Joachim Allgaier,
RWTH Aachen University, Germany
Reviewed by:
Clare Wilkinson,
University of the West of England,
United Kingdom
Thilo Körkel,
Springer Nature, United States
*Correspondence:
Lena Kaul
lena.kaul@student.kit.edu
Philipp Schrögel
philipp.schroegel@kit.edu
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Science and Environmental
Communication,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Communication
Received: 31 August 2020
Accepted: 06 November 2020
Published: 14 December 2020
Citation:
Kaul L, Schrögel P and Humm C
(2020) Environmental Science
Communication for a Young Audience:
A Case Study on the
#EarthOvershootDay Campaign on
YouTube
.
Front. Commun. 5:601177.
doi: 10.3389/fcomm.2020.601177
Environmental Science
Communication for a Young
Audience: A Case Study on the
#EarthOvershootDay Campaign on
YouTube
Lena Kaul*, Philipp Schrögel* and Christian Humm
Department for Science Communication, Institute of Technology Futures, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe,
Germany
Addressing global sustainability challenges such as climate change in democratic
societies requires thorough political and societal debates. Science and environmental
communication is needed to inform these debates. However, not all parts of society
are equally reached by traditional science communication. In particular young people,
especially without academic background, are often left out. The cooperation of
science communicators with inﬂuencers on the video platform YouTube can be a
way to convey scientiﬁc information and raise awareness for environmental issues
with new young audiences. This case study looks at three videos from the campaign
#EarthOvershootDay on YouTube by the WWF (World Wide Fund for Nature) Germany
and the educational initiative MESH Collective. The focus of the analysis lies on
the established success factors of communication through inﬂuencers—speciﬁcally
authenticity, comprehensibility and storytelling—and how they play out in detail in the
three exemplary videos. Besides the analysis of the videos, the study is corroborated by
interviews with the producers and a comment analysis in order to include the perspective
of the viewers. Our analysis conﬁrms previous ﬁndings on science communication with
inﬂuencers and illustrates the practical implementation of these ﬁndings. It shows that
authenticity is a central aspect which is not disturbed through the presentation of scientiﬁc
content. The storytelling approaches are tailored to the respective inﬂuencer and their
style. The language and structure of the videos are simple and comprehensible, scientiﬁc
arguments focus on selected aspects and are tied to examples from everyday life. The
comments by the users support these ﬁndings with the majority of comments addressing
the three aspects of our analysis being positive. However, evidence for an in-depth
engagement with the scientiﬁc contents could not be found in the comments. The stated
goal of the campaign to reach educationally disadvantaged young people was only
reached to a limited degree according to the assessment of the producers. Additionally,
the views of two of the three videos remained below the average for the respective
channel. Taken together this indicates that cooperation with inﬂuencers might not be
an “all-purpose tool” guaranteeing success for science communication.
Keywords:
youtube,
science
communication,
climate
change,
sustainability,
inﬂuencer,
environmental
communication


Kaul et al.
YouTube Case Study #EarthOvershootDay
INTRODUCTION
Scientiﬁc issues lie at the core of many current societal and
political debates (Weingart, 2011)—probably most prominently
in recent years climate change. Science communication plays
an important role in providing information for the public, thus
facilitating these debates, and contributing to opinion-forming
(Thomas and Durant, 1987). However, not all parts of society are
reached by traditional science communication formats (Schrögel
et al., 2018; Humm et al., 2020). One of these groups are children
and young people. While 12- to 19-year-olds are referred to as
a “challenging-to-engage” group for informal science learning
oﬀers (Lloyd et al., 2012, 25f.), they are at the same time an
important target group for science communication—even more
so for environmental communication—as the future generation
(Marris, 2019).
While there has been much talk about the darker sides
of YouTube—such as the spreading of conspiracy myths or
climate change denialism (Basch et al., 2017; Hussain et al., 2018;
Paolillo, 2018; Allgaier, 2019; Ekram et al., 2019)—this article
sheds some light on a brighter side of the video platform: the
potential of YouTube as a tool for science communication to
reach and engage young people.
The video platform YouTube plays an important role
in the learning habits of today’s young people (Jebe et al.,
2019). While there already is a plethora of videos on YouTube
addressing climate change, previous studies show that the
(educational and visual) quality widely varies (Allgaier, 2019).
If environmental science communication wants to reach young
people in this variety of competing oﬀers, new strategies
need to be devised. Following the combination of science
communication and popular culture (Allgaier, 2017), one such
strategy can be the cooperation with established YouTubers as
inﬂuencers, something already common in marketing (Brown
and Hayes, 2008). This article uses the inﬂuencer campaign
#EarthOvershootDay1 on YouTube as a case study to investigate
the characteristics and the potential of such web videos to
reach young people with environmental communication. The
campaign was produced by the educational initiative MESH
Collective2 in cooperation with WWF (World Wide Fund for
Nature) Germany and nine established German YouTubers. It
deals with the overall topic of sustainability and is especially
aimed at young people.
1The so-called Earth Overshoot Day is part of an annual campaign by the NGO
Global Footprint Network and its partner organizations, including the WWF. It
“marks the date when humanity’s demand for ecological resources and services
in a given year exceeds what Earth can regenerate in that year” (Global Footprint
Network, 2020).
2MESH Collective was founded in 2010 under the name “DU HAST DIE MACHT”
by the Robert Bosch Stiftung and the ﬁlm and production company UFA. Since
then, it has been dealing with the extracurricular digital education of young people
who are less interested in politics and education (von Kempis, 2016, 34). The
education initiative develops video campaigns for its clients (e.g., foundations,
NGOs, ministries) for YouTube, with a focus on knowledge transfer to speciﬁc
target groups (MESH Collective, n.d.). Today, MESH Collective is a brand of
Divimove GmbH which is part of the RTL Group, an international media company
based in Luxembourg.
The case study focuses on the three aspects of authenticity,
comprehensibility,
and
storytelling
when
communicating
through inﬂuencers. Authenticity can, on the one hand, be
part of the linguistic design (e.g., use of youth language) and
on the other hand be transported through further levels such
as the setting, facial expressions, and gestures, or the type of
argumentation. Comprehensibility for and appeal to young
people can be achieved by everyday language, a comprehensible
structure, visualizations as well as an appealing narrative style
(storytelling). The question of the case study is, how these factors
manifest themselves in the video material, how the production
process works and potentially inﬂuences the video design, and
how the videos are perceived by the audience. Speciﬁcally, one
key aspect is if inﬂuencer communication with scientiﬁc content
is perceived as inauthentic.
In order to gain insights into the characteristics of the videos,
we conducted a qualitative content analysis of three of them.
Additionally, interviews were conducted with the responsible
persons at MESH Collective, the WWF as well as one of
the YouTubers to gain insights into the production process
and its evaluation. Furthermore, to include the perspective of
recipients, the comments on the selected videos were subjected
to a quantitative content analysis.
THEORY AND BACKGROUND
Engaging a Young Audience With Science
and Environmental Communication on
YouTube
While children and young people are for quite some time
being addressed speciﬁcally by science communication in an
educational context and through approaches to increase the
number of students in STEM (science, technology, engineering,
and math) subjects, these eﬀorts most often focus on activities
such as school workshops, open laboratories or science
festivals (Rennie, 2014). With the focus on attracting potential
future students, many activities concentrate on pupils in
academically
oriented
secondary
education.
Furthermore,
students’
engagement
and
identiﬁcation
with
science
is
inﬂuenced by existing social inequalities (Archer et al., 2012).
The usage of the video platform YouTube might oﬀer
the possibility to engage with young people and, thus, to
address these limitations with science and environmental
communication outside the school context. YouTube is the
second most visited website globally (Alexa, 2020), and according
to a representative survey almost two-thirds of 12- to 19-year-
olds in Germany consider YouTube as one of their favorite
Internet oﬀerings. Almost all respondents (90%) used the
platform at least several times a week. After search queries via
Google, YouTube is their most important research tool, with 55%
using the platform regularly for information search (Feierabend
et al., 2020, 27, 38, 41). Furthermore, people not only watch
videos on YouTube, but commenting and rating of the videos
play an important role as well (Geipel, 2018, 140).
Regarding issues and interests, environmental protection and
problems are a present topic for young people in Germany.
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
2
December 2020 | Volume 5 | Article 601177


Kaul et al.
YouTube Case Study #EarthOvershootDay
Although they see themselves as responsible, they also address
their negligence, e.g., in waste avoidance (Calmbach et al.,
2016, 272). However, awareness and interest in environmental
issues are strongly inﬂuenced by social status and inequalities.
This can be seen when looking at participation in the Fridays
For Future (FFF) movement as an example. A study on the
participants in climate protests in March 2019 in 13 European
cities found that “[a]mong FFF-protesters, too, the highly-
educated parts of society are overrepresented. School students
attending the FFF demonstrations deﬁnitely have a well-educated
family background” (Wahlström et al., 2019, 10).
Looking beyond that, especially at the milieu of materialistic
hedonists3, one can see that many are afraid of being conspicuous
as “tree huggers” due to too much interest in environmental
protection. If at all, their interest focuses on speciﬁc everyday
examples, such as saving energy, rather than the global context.
They are strongly oriented toward what the majority is doing
(Calmbach et al., 2016, 267, 272).
With regard to speciﬁc actions for climate and environmental
protection, young people especially from this milieu assess their
eﬀectiveness as low. Compared to environmental protection,
climate change is seen as something that is far away and takes
place on other continents. Accordingly, fewer are willing to get
involved in this. Many young people also lack knowledge about
the larger context of climate change or what they can do in
concrete terms. Especially those with low formal education are
indiﬀerent to the topic and do not see climate change as too
problematic (Calmbach et al., 2016, 277–284).
The term “critical consumption” is little known among young
people in Germany, but the debates about it, e.g., questionable
production conditions, are. Materialistic hedonists in particular
“actively name the production and distribution problems of
cheap fashion brands” (Calmbach et al., 2016, 287), but do not
want to change their behavior, as price and appearance are more
important to them than fair production conditions (Calmbach
et al., 2016, 294).
In summary, there seems to be a growing interest in
sustainability issues and the topic is also seen as important—
although this is varying with educational and social backgrounds.
One common challenge for young people, in general, is that there
apparently still is a lack of low-threshold information and tips for
concrete action.
At the same time, the issue of sustainability has been gaining
a lot of attention on YouTube in recent time, as is evident
in the YouTube Trends Snapshot for the ﬁrst quarter of 2019
(Pettie, 2019). However, while web videos are now regularly used
for science and environmental communication, research on it
is limited (Allgaier, 2016, 19; Geipel, 2018, 150) as the main
focus of content research still focuses on print media (Schäfer,
2017, 282f.).
3Materialistic Hedonists are one of several milieus from the Sinus Youth Study.
They are the “leisure- and family-oriented lower class with pronounced brand-
conscious consumer desires” (Calmbach et al., 2016, 91). Mostly they have low
formal education. On television, they follow entertainment formats such as talk
and reality shows or infotainment. Girls in particular like to follow the lives of stars
in the media. They are usually not interested in further education outside school,
so as not to be considered as “nerds” (Calmbach et al., 2016).
As a component of popular culture, the content on YouTube
inﬂuences how science and scientists are perceived by the public
(Allgaier, 2017, 242). This is both a potential and a risk. On
the one hand, science YouTubers can positively change the
public’s perception of science, on the other hand, could YouTube
very well also be an “El Dorado for conspiracy theorists”
(Allgaier, 2016, 20). This makes it all the more important for
serious content to become more established. However, scientiﬁc
institutions, in particular, have not been very active to date
with regard to online (moving image) formats (Schäfer, 2017,
279). This is reﬂected in the observation that YouTube channels
without a direct connection to scientiﬁc institutions seem to have
a much greater reach than those from such institutions (Boy,
2020).
With regard to potential audiences, the evidence also conﬁrms
that YouTube can be a suitable channel to engage young people
with science, as illustrated by a representative survey from
Germany: 42% of the 14- to 29-year-olds reported that they
use YouTube either frequently or very frequently to inform
themselves about science and research online (Wissenschaft im
Dialog, 2018, 76). This ﬁnding is in line with other studies
that show that YouTube plays an important role as information
source and learning tool for school content (Jebe et al., 2019, 55;
Feierabend et al., 2020, 40).
Analysis Dimensions–Relevant
Components for Science Communication
With Younger Audiences Through Web
Videos
When communicating science with children and adolescents,
appealing examples as well as an understandable, not “too
scientiﬁc language” are important to avoid a gap between
“knowledge authority” and the target group (Marschalek and
Schrammel, 2017, 15). Additionally, guidelines for science
communication with underserved audiences can be useful.
Common recommendations are, that science communication
activities should be relevant for the audiences, take place
at locations they normally use—including virtual places like
YouTube–, in cooperation with persons or organizations they
can relate to or have established connections as well as seeking
to reduce the distance between communicator and audience
(Humm and Schrögel, 2020).
In comparison to television, the sender, the context, as well
as the target audience and its handling of social media in online
environments are of greater importance, since new videos are
constantly being suggested at the edge of the screen and the
audience could click away at any time. A precise knowledge of the
target group and the respective platform is, therefore, necessary
for the production of successful scientiﬁc web videos (Krachten,
2016, 29).
Entertainment plays an important role for web videos. The
typical intro serves the dramaturgical structure of the video; it
must be directly clear to the viewer why it has to be watched
to the end and should be as short as possible. The outro at the
end of the video should lead to further videos via links, usually it
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
3
December 2020 | Volume 5 | Article 601177


Kaul et al.
YouTube Case Study #EarthOvershootDay
also contains an invitation to subscribe (Krachten, 2016, 29–31;
Muñoz Morcillo et al., 2016a, 124).
Going beyond these more general ﬁndings, three factors seem
to be particularly relevant for science communication with a
young audience: authenticity, comprehensibility and storytelling.
The Role of Authenticity
Authenticity is an essential feature of successful web videos. The
YouTuber must make the format “his/her” format: “The young
target group loves real people who act authentically. [...] The
presenter must be on ﬁre for the program” (Krachten, 2016, 28).
Two elements seem to be central for authenticity. On the one
hand, a familiar face that presents content in a credible way
(Welbourne and Grant, 2016, 715), and on the other hand the
means of expression used to present this content, for example by
ﬁlming at “workplaces that seem authentic” or “everyday clothes
and everyday language” (Breuer, 2012, 105f.).
Subsequently, two aspects of the components contributing to
the perceived authenticity of a video are described more in-depth:
inﬂuencers as authentic and familiar faces for their peers and
the role of everyday language, particularly youth language, as a
speciﬁc component of expression.
Authentic and Familiar Faces—Inﬂuencers
Well-known YouTubers can act as trusted intermediaries
between the provider and the audience. The early concepts of
using inﬂuencers—inﬂuential people in their respective local or
peer communities—for marketing did not consider social media
to be the most important aspect (Brown and Hayes, 2008, 166).
But with the exponential growth of social media platforms and
users worldwide, today inﬂuencers are primarily seen as a digital
phenomenon (Seeger and Kost, 2018, 13–15).
Empirical studies conﬁrm that the authenticity, more
speciﬁcally being relatable to, as well as the appeal of
inﬂuencers create their value for marketing: “(...) inﬂuencers’
trustworthiness, attractiveness, and perceived similarity (to their
followers) positively inﬂuenced their followers’ trust in their
branded posts” (Lou and Yuan, 2019, 68). This is conﬁrmed for
social media in general as well as for YouTube inﬂuencers in
particular (Xiao et al., 2018).
These mechanisms can also be used for science and
environmental communication. Welbourne and Grant (2016)
have shown that user-generated science communication content
with a continuous presenter (as the face of the video/channel) is
more popular in comparison to professionally generated content,
e.g., by science institutions—although today’s inﬂuencers can
be considered professionals, especially with respect to video
production methods and technology. Muñoz Morcillo et al.
(2016b) found in a content analysis of 200 popular science web
videos that the videos are mostly shot by amateurs, but that
professionalization is taking place. This development has been
conﬁrmed in a follow up study (Muñoz Morcillo et al., 2019).
The cooperation with inﬂuencers allows educational content
to reach other audiences (von Kempis, 2016, 35), although one
has to consider questions of credibility, quality, and ethics,
especially for areas such as health communication (Altendorfer,
2019)—inﬂuencers can have a considerable impact within their
communities but also reaching beyond that as the case of the
YouTuber Rezo has shown. He triggered a nationwide debate on
politics and climate change in Germany with one video attacking
the conservative party (Allgaier, 2020).
Authentic Expression–Youth Language
Youth language as a variety of language like dialects or technical
language (Femers-Koch, 2018, 112) can be deﬁned as an “orally
constituted medium of group communication used by young
people in certain situations” (Neuland, 2018, 90). In general,
youth language facilitates information exchange on eye level and
functions as a show of solidarity and belonging to a certain social
group and distinction to other groups. On the individual level
it can also be part of developing and expressing identity and
lifestyle (Bahlo et al., 2019). Thus, is it not surprising that in
advertisement youth language is used “to establish proximity to
the target group” (Femers-Koch, 2018, 116) and to enable a direct
and emotional address. It has to be noted, that this approach is
not seen uncritically: “Popular formats for the youth rarely oﬀer
authentic role-models with positive potential for development,
but rather archetypal narratives and stereotypic language, that
can be marketed more broadly [regarding ≫culture industry≪
see Horkheimer and Adorno (2006)]” (Bahlo et al., 2019, 108).
According to Bahlo et al. (2019, 55–77), youth language
can be identiﬁed by several features, for example by their
morphology, the usage of anglicisms, and the inﬂuence of
diﬀerent domains like media, fashion, or sport. For this study,
terms were classiﬁed as youth language if they were marked as
youth language in the German dictionary Duden or—depending
on the context—anglicisms.
The Role of Comprehensibility
Good comprehensibility serves to keep the cognitive load of the
stimulus as low as possible and thus, according to the so-called
Limited Capacity Model (Lang, 2000)4, promotes information
processing and knowledge transfer.
So far, comprehensibility in science communication has been
investigated primarily for texts (Langer et al., 2011) and in the
audiovisual sector for scientiﬁc TV reports (Milde, 2009; Lauter,
2018). However, the comprehensibility of scientiﬁc web videos
has not yet been speciﬁcally researched.
Three studies show several characteristics that inﬂuence
the
comprehensibility
positively—following
the
Hamburg
Comprehensibility Model (Langer et al., 2011): simplicity (e.g.,
language, visualizations), structure, brevity, and stimulating
features (e.g., examples, storytelling, personalization, emotions)
(Milde, 2009, 126, 137, 245; Langer et al., 2011, 21f.; Lauter,
2018, 416).
The Role of Storytelling
One method that serves to improve comprehensibility is
storytelling. This means that the information to be conveyed
is presented in narrative form (Früh et al., 2014, 46).
4According to the Limited Capacity Model (LCM) the human brain’s cognitive
capacities for encoding, saving and retrieval of information are limited. The
information processing is inﬂuenced on the one hand by the recipient (cognitive
eﬀort) and on the other hand by the stimulus (cognitive load). In order to inﬂuence
the information processing positively, one has to reduce the cognitive load while at
the same time increase the attention.
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
4
December 2020 | Volume 5 | Article 601177


Kaul et al.
YouTube Case Study #EarthOvershootDay
TABLE 1 | Overview on the three videos analyzed in the case study.
Video title
NiksDa–Kein Thema (prod.
Dalton) | #EarthOvershootDay
NACHHALTIGKEIT and
KLEIDUNG–Tipps für Einsteiger
#EarthOvershootDay
Plastic in Paradise–mein Urlaub
im Müll #EarthOvershootDay
YouTube channel
NiksDa
Typisch Sissi
Dillan white
Number of subscribers (channel)
127 000
251 000
365 000
Average views per video (channel)
90 650
38 659
156 785
Date
18.01.2019
07.11.2018
13.09.2018
Length
05 m 18 s
09 m 02 s
07 m 11 s
Views
125 293
15 322
29 821
Likes/Dislikes (ratio)
12,330/375 (32, 88)
785/20 (39, 25)
3,982/16 (248, 88)
Number of comments
1,057
87
221
Video URL
https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=Fwz4T63IHmA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=iwhe6qtTP9k
https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=Ja1JSLQGDr8
Abbreviation
video_nd
video_ts
video_dw
Number of subscribers, views as of 06/29/2020 and comments as of 02/11/2020. The average number of views per video were determined with the help of the R package tuber in
version 0.9.9 (Sood, 2020).
Communication scholars characterize narratives by a mediating
instance (narrator) that selects the events, puts them in
perspective, and unfolds them in a temporal structure (Früh
et al., 2014, 46–50; Metten et al., 2016, 110). By presenting
the messages from an individual perspective (of the narrator or
ﬁctional characters), the audience can identify with them more
easily (Dahlstrom and Scheufele, 2018, 1). Storytelling is about
creating tension, empathic participation, and/or curiosity, which
is usually achieved by a pictorial narrative (Früh et al., 2014, 46f.).
Narrative thinking “is thought to represent the default
mode of human thought” (Dahlstrom, 2014, 13615). It presents
itself as an evolutionary advantage since it enables people to
imagine diﬀerent possible realities and thus to better predict
cause-and-eﬀect relationships and to put themselves in the
position of others (Dahlstrom, 2014, 13615). Accordingly, the
narrative mode is also more common in everyday life than
the descriptive-argumentative mode (Früh et al., 2014, 63).
Storytelling thus oﬀers great potential for the communication
of scientiﬁc content, especially by linking it to the recipients’
world of experience. Empirical studies have shown a higher recall
rate, better comprehensibility, and shorter reading times for texts
(Dahlstrom, 2014, 13615; Früh et al., 2014, 166).
An analysis of web videos shows the distinct talent for
storytelling and personalization of YouTubers, describing it as
probably the most important aspect of these videos (Muñoz
Morcillo et al., 2016b, 20f.). Thus, liveliness, passion and creative
storytelling are essential elements (Krachten, 2016, 29f.). Most
of these characteristics apply to the typical approach and style
of many inﬂuencers, and the presentation from a narrator’s
perspective itself has a close connection to the factor authenticity
described above.
CASE STUDY VIDEO MATERIAL
In this case study a concrete example of the cooperation
with
inﬂuencers
is
examined:
The
video
campaign
#EarthOvershootDay on YouTube. The German education
initiative MESH Collective, together with the World Wide Fund
For Nature (WWF) and the Robert Bosch Foundation, facilitated
the production of nine videos in cooperation with established
YouTubers for a campaign on environmental topics. While the
Robert Bosch Foundation ﬁnanced the campaign, the WWF was
responsible for the scientiﬁc contents and MESH Collective
coordinated the video production.
The video campaign consists of videos with a length of 5 to
15 min, published between 1st August 2018 and 29th July 2019.
The campaign aimed to sensitize young people for the issue and
show them possible courses of action (Robert Bosch Stiftung).
Three of these nine videos were randomly selected and
analyzed in detail. Table 1 shows the three videos selected for
the analysis; a detailed scene protocol can be found in the
Supplementary Tables 2–4).
The ﬁrst video was produced together with the YouTuber
Niklas Kolorz, who acts under his stage name NiksDa and
operates an eponymous YouTube channel. Accordingly, the
video is referred to in the study with the abbreviation video_nd.
The video deals with the topic of meat consumption. The ﬁrst
and at the same time the main part of the video (00:00–04:39)
consists of a music video with its typical structure: instrumental
intro, insertion of interpreter (NiksDa) and title (“Kein Thema”
[“Not an issue”]) as well as three times verse and chorus. The
setting is an Italian restaurant. A young man (played by NiksDa)
invites a woman (played by another well-known YouTuber—
Sina aka Fräulein Chaos) for a date. When she wants to order
a steak, the subject of meat consumption comes up. Alternating
the two of them bring up their arguments for and against meat
consumption. In the chorus, which also forms the conclusion, the
tabooing of the topic is addressed. In the second part of the video,
NiksDa welcomes the viewers and invites them to comment,
subscribe, and rate.
The
second
video
was
produced
together
with
Sissi
Kandziora), whose channel name is Typisch Sissi and who
is known on YouTube as Sissi. Her video is abbreviated here with
video_ts. In the video Sissi is sitting on a sofa in her apartment
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
5
December 2020 | Volume 5 | Article 601177


Kaul et al.
YouTube Case Study #EarthOvershootDay
and tells the viewers tips and possible courses of action on
how they can deal with clothing in a more sustainable way. In
doing so, she draws a connection to her past, i.e., her “shopping
addiction,” as she says, and gives some (scientiﬁc) arguments
on the subject of clothing consumption. In the run-up to the
event, she conducted a Skype interview with the scientist Samira
Iran, of which she uses cutaway images (without sound). For the
interview, she created a separate video.
The third video was produced together with Dillan White. His
channel carries his name, but with a dot at the end: dillan white.
Thus, we refer to the video with the abbreviation video_dw. For
the reportage style video Dillan White traveled to Croatia and
shows the problems of plastic waste in seas and oceans in his
video. He meets with the “Meeres-Verbündeten” (“sea allies”) of
the WWF youth and collects plastic waste together with them. He
reports about his experiences and reinforces his impressions with
scientiﬁc arguments.
The channels of these three YouTubers each have very
diﬀerent thematic focuses and correspondingly their own target
groups. The channel NiksDa has been very much concerned
with gaming and music videos in the past. The channel also
features vlogs (video blogs), self-experiments, travel videos, and
a knowledge series “Verstandgebläse” [roughly “mind blower”].
Niklas Kolorz has meanwhile retired from the gaming sector as
he announced in various comments on his channel.
Sissi Kandziora’s channel Typisch Sissi focuses mainly on
topics like cleaning and tidying up. She always shoots her
videos from home and shows how she sorts things out,
rearranges rooms, and gives useful everyday tips on how
to live more “consciously.” On her website, she describes
her values with authenticity, honesty, sustainability, natural
ingredients, and fair production. According to self-reported
information, about 85% of her followers are female and most
of them (70%) are between 18 and 34 years old (Kandziora,
2020).
Dillan White, at 21, is the youngest of the three YouTubers
and has not yet dealt with sustainability issues on his channel. He
deals with fashion and lifestyle, travel, “stupidities,” challenges,
and music. No further information on his target group could
be found apart from the statements made in the interviews.
The producers estimated that it is aimed more at younger, less
formally educated, and consumption-oriented viewers (JA)5.
METHODS
This study explores what characterizes the three analyzed videos
of the #EarthOvershootDay campaign and their assessment
through producers and viewers as well as how these ﬁndings
could be relevant for the broader question, how scientiﬁc and
environmental topics can reach a young audience through the
cooperation with inﬂuencers on YouTube. In order to do so,
three methods were triangulated: a qualitative content analysis
of the videos, guided interviews with producers and one of
5The quotations are from the interviews with the producers conducted for this
study. The abbreviations stand for the respective interviewees (see Table 2).
TABLE 2 | Overview on the interviewees for the production perspective.
Name
Institution/role
Initials
Julia Althoff
Head of MESH collective
JA
Nikolas Kappe
Senior editor at MESH collective
NK
Tina Harms
WWF, consultant for digital education
TH
Sissi Kandziora
YouTuber Typisch Sissi
SK
the YouTubers, as well as a quantitative content analysis of
the comments.
Guided Interviews With Producers
The producers were interviewed to gain insights into the
production process and especially their strategies and motives.
The semi-structured phone interviews were conducted and
recorded in April 2019 and lasted between 30 and 50 min.
Interviews were conducted with representatives from the
organizations behind the campaign as well as the YouTuber Sissi
(see Table 2). The other two YouTubers from the selected videos,
NiksDa and Dillan White, were not available for an interview at
the time of data collection.
An interview guide with ﬁve categories was used for
all interviews and the coding of the answers: target group,
project execution, aims and purposes, strategies and design
tools,
and
assessment
of
the
campaign’s
success.
The
subcategories for further analysis were formed inductively
(see Supplementary Table 1).
By interviewing several people, a multi-perspective picture
was obtained, which can be related to the content analysis of the
videos, e.g., to what extent aims and intentions and the strategies
correlate with the actual video design. The questions about the
project execution and assessments of its success serve as a ﬁrst
classiﬁcation of how well the project worked. The transcripts of
the interviews were also evaluated by content analysis using the
above-mentioned categories.
Qualitative Video Analysis
For the examination on stimulus level a scene protocol
(see Supplementary Tables 2–4) was made for each video to
investigate the visual aspects. This together with transcripts of
the videos provided the basis for the qualitative content analysis
(Kuckartz, 2018).
The hierarchical category formation was deductive-inductive.
The three main categories for the analysis of the videos
were authenticity, comprehensibility, and storytelling. The
subcategories emerged partly deductively from the theory and
partly new subcategories were formed inductively based on the
material. The entire category system for the analysis of the video
transcripts is shown in Table 3. Suggestions for the categories
were provided by the works of Milde (2009), Langer et al. (2011),
Breuer (2012), Dahlstrom (2014), von Kempis (2016), Krachten
(2016), Muñoz Morcillo et al. (2016b), Welbourne and Grant
(2016), and Lauter (2018).
The category “Authenticity” comprises two dimensions.
Firstly, how convincingly the YouTuber presents the respective
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
6
December 2020 | Volume 5 | Article 601177


Kaul et al.
YouTube Case Study #EarthOvershootDay
TABLE 3 | Category system for the analysis of the video transcripts.
Authenticity
Comprehensibility
Storytelling
• Youth language
• Setting
• Argumentation
◦Adherence to
scientiﬁc
arguments
◦References to
youth lifestyle
◦Facial expression
and gestures
• Everyday language
• Technical terms
• Complexity of the
sentences
• Structure of the video
• Visualization techniques
• Emotionalization
• Concrete examples
• Personalization
• Involving
the audience
For this analysis, “scientiﬁc arguments” are presented aspects that can be concrete
numbers or other data, theories and models/explanations as well as science or
knowledge-based issues and background information.
topic. This is operationalized with the argumentation as well as
some elements of storytelling. On the other hand, how authentic
the staging is, which is operationalized by the use of youth
language and the setting.
For the categories “Comprehensibility” and “Storytelling,” the
Hamburg Comprehensibility Model was used. The subcategories
for “Storytelling” are mainly formed based on Früh et al. (2014)
and Dahlstrom (2014). The categories are not disjunct. Some
categories that are assigned to comprehensibility also play a role
in authenticity and vice versa, e.g., everyday language or the type
of argumentation.
Quantitative Content Analysis of
Comments
The viewers’ perspective on and their assessment of the videos are
included through a quantitative analysis of the comments on the
three selected videos to evaluate the outcome with respect to the
producers’ strategies and aims.
A snapshot of all comments was downloaded at 02/11/2020.
Comments by the YouTubers on their own videos were
excluded from the analysis. Thus, out of 1,366 comments,
35 were excluded from the actual analysis. The restwere
coded in three categories, which are slightly diﬀerent to
the three main analysis dimensions to better capture the
audience perspective:
• Topic Choice
Comments addressing the chosen topic or focus of the
selected aspects within the video and/or the overall topic area
of sustainability, environment or similar overarching areas
related to the respective content.
• Comprehensibility
Comments addressing the comprehensibility, especially with
respect to the (scientiﬁc) information within the video (e.g.,
models and theories, data, sources).
• Presentation Style
Comments addressing the presentation style in the video,
including setting/location, speech, acting and performance,
visuals, sound eﬀects, cut or other aspects.
Each category has four possible manifestations:
• Negative comment criticizing the category’s aspect
• Comment with both negative and positive aspects regarding
the category’s aspect
• Positive comment lauding the category’s aspect
• Aspect not mentioned.
Each comment was coded independently by two people. The
codings were then compared and in the case of diﬀerences
a consensual solution was agreed on—so-called “consensual
coding” (Hopf and Schmidt, 1993, 61–63).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The Production Perspective on the
Campaign
The Campaign’s Target Group
According to the producers, the campaign was aimed at the age
group of 16- to 24-year-olds. Initially, the focus was on reaching
educationally disadvantaged young people, which was still an
important target group, however, this shifted later on toward
a more mixed audience. Tina Harms explained that the Sinus
Milieu studies were used as a point of orientation, and that
the main target group were materialistic hedonists and young
people who “have not yet come into contact with science” (TH).
Ultimately, however, young people with an aﬃnity for education
should also be reached. The producers wanted to make sure
that the channels’ “communities have as diﬀerent focal points of
interest as possible” (JA).
Sissi Kandziora described her viewers as mainly older than
20 years, “open to the topic” and said that many are rethinking
through her channel (SK). However, this would not be the broad
mass but “the reasonable ones, who also want to think further and
educate themselves” (SK).
The Production Process
Within the campaign, MESH Collective was responsible for the
editing and production of the videos and formed a bridge of
communication between YouTubers and scientists. They were
also responsible for selecting the YouTubers. On the one hand,
they selected YouTubers, with whom MESH Collective had
already worked together, and on the other hand, new ones
were picked, “who are active in the classic gaming, make-up,
travel sector—to match their followers a bit to the “consumer
hedonistically” oriented” (TH), so that the channels are diverse
in terms of interests.
The WWF provided the scientiﬁc content in the project and
organized a workshop with young people and scientists in the
run-up to the project. There they worked out which topics the
young people ﬁnd exciting. The participants were recruited via
Twitter messages from the YouTubers as well as via school
mailing lists and social services. Together with the WWF and
MESH Collective, scientists then produced fact sheets with the
most important information on the topic ideas.
The YouTubers met at a workshop to discuss the topics in-
depth and decide which topic best suits them and their channel
so that they can convey the topic authentically. Scientists were
also present at this workshop. Scripts for the videos were created
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
7
December 2020 | Volume 5 | Article 601177


Kaul et al.
YouTube Case Study #EarthOvershootDay
by the YouTubers themselves, and they needed to write them
in their language and style. If desired, MESH Collective oﬀered
support, e.g., in creating animations or searching for locations.
The ﬁnished scripts were ﬁnally scientiﬁcally reviewed by the
WWF and the YouTubers received feedback on their concepts.
Objectives of the Campaign
The producers named two main goals of the campaign. First,
MESH Collective wanted “to place the issue of climate change
in communities, such as Dillan White’s, which are all about
fashion, to create awareness. [...] And to give help close to
everyday life” (JA).” The second was the sponsor’s—the Robert
Bosch Foundation—goal of getting young people interested in
science. This involved primarily reaching out to young people
“whom we would not have reached otherwise” (NK), as well as “to
initiate a dialogue between scientists and YouTubers and young
people” (TH). Achieving a change in attitude and behavior was
also desired, however, it was not the primary goal, but rather
the “cherry on top” (TH). Sissi Kandziora stated that she mainly
wanted to draw attention to the topic as she “had just become
very interested in the topic of sustainability, as she used to
consume a lot” (SK).
Strategies for the Video Production
The strategies mentioned in the interviews to achieve these
objectives can be classiﬁed at two diﬀerent levels: On the one
hand, structural factors concerning the choice of platform and the
concept, and on the other hand, the way the topic is presented in
the videos. With regard to the former, Julia Althoﬀ, for example,
emphasized that they deliberately chose YouTube because
moving images are—in her opinion—particularly suitable for
conveying information and are clicked on more often. In
addition, the cooperation between MESH Collective, YouTubers,
and WWF would have enabled synergies. The presentation of
the topics by the YouTubers themselves would have enabled
optimal access to the target group. While MESH Collective
would have supported the YouTubers in preparing the contents
in a journalistically sound manner and the WWF would have
provided scientiﬁc information (JA). From Tina Harms’ point
of view, positive eﬀects can be achieved with the target group
by using new formats such as the rap video by NiksDa. Sissi
explained that she also paid attention to video length and
short intros.
Concerning the video design, all interviewees emphasized
(sometimes several times) the importance of authenticity. The
secret is,
“that we use the creativity and what the YouTubers have built up
to convey our content, and that we use the language at the same
level as the young people” (NK),
“that the video doesn’t drop out of the channel scheme, i.e.,
doesn’t disturb the viewing habits; that we observe very closely
with the YouTuber, what works on the channel and embed it in
the program scheme, what formats are already on the channel and
prepare the video accordingly” (JA),
“that the YouTubers could authentically convey a theme in their
way, but they were also convinced of it themselves.” (TH)
The YouTubers were accordingly given a “freehand” (NK) in
the design. The close cooperation with the YouTubers and the
trust in their work, as well as the intensive contemplation of the
target group were seen by the interviewees as a central strategy of
the project, e.g., through the abovementioned workshop. When
preparing the information and producing the videos, care was
also taken to establish a connection to the life world of the
recipients, which the YouTubers would easily achieve through
their person alone (JA; NK; TH).
Besides authenticity, comprehensibility was a decisive factor
and had to be adapted to the target group. The videos should
not contain too much, but also not too little information
(NK). The information should be conveyed in the videos rather
casually and not with a raised foreﬁnger (TH). Furthermore,
the producers claimed that care was taken to ensure that
the videos are comprehensible by using simple language,
explaining technical terms, and, if necessary, using graphics.
This was “always in the foreground” (JA) according to MESH
Collective. Graphics or insertions also should make the video
more interesting, as Sissi Kandziora emphasized. Nikolas Kappe
explained that he paid attention to the tension and dramaturgy
of the videos. After all, according to Tina Harms, it had to be
also “somehow be a cool story,” referring to the importance
of storytelling.
Encountered Challenges
The interviewees also reported challenges during project
implementation. On the one hand, the support of the YouTubers
was time-consuming, agreements had to be contractually agreed
(JA; TH). On the other hand, the diﬀerent interests and ideas
of all actors had to be brought to a common denominator. The
basic question in the project was: “What does science mean and
how do you make that visible?” (TH) This was discussed and
explored together within the team. The Robert Bosch Foundation
as sponsor—who normally has nothing to do with YouTube—
had to be persuaded at ﬁrst, so that they “accept the slang
and dynamics of YouTube” (JA). Also, especially “the scientists
had to be very, very open to this format” (TH). Not least
for this reason, it was also a challenge to “get scientists at
all” (TH).
Thus, although the topic was “not met on all channels with
the same level of interest” (JA), “discourses were initiated” on
all channels, and awareness was created (JA). Besides, there
were many positive comments below the videos and feedback
also on corresponding Instagram posts (JA; NK; SK). Negative
comments, which, for example, question the scientiﬁc sources,
had not been noticed (NK). These impressions are corroborated
by our quantitative comment analysis.
It is diﬃcult to judge whether there has been a change in the
viewers’ thinking or behavior, but this was not the primary goal
of the campaign according to Nikolas Kappe and Tina Harms.
She notes: “Many watched the video, many wrote a comment,
but much less went to the landing page [of the campaign],” so
there would still be room for improvement here. Sissi Kandziora,
on the other hand, states that she received many messages from
viewers who rethink through her channel.
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
8
December 2020 | Volume 5 | Article 601177


Kaul et al.
YouTube Case Study #EarthOvershootDay
FIGURE 1 | Impressions from the production of the videos for (A) NiksDa and
(B) dillan white showing the variance in setting, staging and presentation style
used within the different contributions to the #EarthOvershootDay campaign
(Photos: Nikolas Kappe, MESH Collective).
Video Analysis
Authenticity
Use of Youth Language and Everyday Language
The analysis of the scene protocols shows that youth language
was used very little in the videos, but everyday language is
used in all videos. Only the music video by NiksDa contains
some explicit youth language terms. Due to its genre, this video
represents a special case. The language here is aligned to song
lyrics of the genre hip-hop, to which this video is assigned, and
therefore possibly contains more youth language expressions—
however with only just 16 occurrences—than the other two
videos. The two other YouTubers speak in a very natural way.
Filler words and occasional “ums” [“ähms”] make the language
appear authentic and natural.
Setting
In each of the three videos, the setting corresponds to the
respective YouTuber, his or her channel, and the topic.
Accordingly, the ﬁlming locations and the presentation diﬀer
substantially between the videos (see Figure 1).
The music video (video_nd) was shot in a Berlin restaurant.
Most of the time the two main characters are shown at the
table (e.g., scenes 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 32). However, other people
can also be seen in the restaurant (e.g., scenes 5, 35). All in
all, the situation appears realistic, even if the actions are staged
and do not correspond to everyday actions (e.g., dancing in the
restaurant during the chorus). This, however, corresponds to the
video’s genre.
Sissi Kandziora shot her video (video_ts), like all her other
videos, at home. In almost all scenes, she sits on a couch and
talks in a private, homely atmosphere (e.g., scene 1). This gives
a feeling of closeness as if the viewer is talking to a friend.
According to Sissi Kandziora’s interview, this is also what she
wants to achieve (SK).
The third video by Dillan White (video_dw) was ﬁlmed at
several locations in Croatia, mostly on the beach, which gives
a “holiday feeling” on the one hand. This is especially visible
in the entrance scene. The beauty of the landscape is explicitly
emphasized by ﬁlming at sunset (e.g., scene 1–3) or aerial shots
(scene 5). On the other hand, this seemingly intact world is
broken by the amount of plastic waste shown in the video. For
example, shots of the huge garbage carpets on the sea (scene 4),
numerous close-ups of the plastic waste (e.g., scenes 4 and 10),
or when Dillan White visits a local garbage dump (scenes 7–10)
illustrate the extent of the problem.
Argumentations
Each YouTuber in the analyzed videos uses his or her own story
and way of argumentation to impart the topic to their viewers.
NiksDa tries to convey the topic to the audience in the context of
a dialogue story close to everyday life without being instructive.
This can also be seen in the lyrics when he says: “No one changes
their opinion in the shade of a raised index ﬁnger pointing at
them” (TC6: 03:40). In the lyrics, he also admits that he does
not want a “crusade,” but to make the importance of the issue
clear: “But if nobody acts, climate change will win here in this
country” (TC: 03:44). In the end, he leaves it open to the female
protagonist Sina whether she eats meat, implicitly appealing to
the responsibility of each individual. A ﬁnal instruction for action
is accordingly not explicitly given. However, the screeching
noises of pigs and knife blades in connection with rapidly
changing images (scene 50, TC: 04:03) shortly before the end
of the song can be seen as a last emotionalizing argument that
should make the audience reﬂect. In the second part of the video,
in which Niklas Kolorz comments on the video, he refers to the
link in the description for more information on the scientiﬁc
arguments. He also calls for discussion in the comments but
otherwise does not go into the subject in further detail.
In Sissi’s video, personal reference plays a particularly
important role. She speaks to her followers as a peer by reporting
about her personal experiences: “If you’ve known me for a while,
you might know I used to be a shopaholic, and clothes were
just fun for me” (TC: 00:19-00:27). In this way, she creates a
connection to the viewer, who may also be able to identify with
it. She then explains how she came to change her mind. In doing
so, she emphasizes that she is making mistakes too: “Even today
I am not free of mistakes. There are moments from time to time
when I buy something that has not been produced fairly” (TC:
01:17-01:24). Overall, she does not present herself as an expert
(e.g., TC: 01:47), which she also emphasized in the interview (SK).
6TC: time code.
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
9
December 2020 | Volume 5 | Article 601177


Kaul et al.
YouTube Case Study #EarthOvershootDay
She mentions a total of eight scientiﬁc arguments on the subject
of sustainable clothing, which she does not simply string together,
but closely links to her tips and her point of view. In doing so, she
tries to use concrete examples to refer to the lives of young people,
for example when she says: “Sure, if you want to buy a new shirt
for a party every week, then that’s expensive. But if you buy a good
quality shirt, where you know you’ll get something out of it, then
it’s more sustainable” (TC: 05:17-05:26). With this, she appeals
to the viewers to become aware of their values without directly
prescribing anything to them—similar to Niklas Kolorz’ video.
She explains that she has spoken with a scientist about the topic
and also mentions the extra video for this, which underlines the
soundness of her statements (TC: 02:04-02:21). At the same time,
she wants to make the audience curious by saying: “I’m going to
tell you a lot of things she told me” (TC: 02:21).
Of the three YouTubers, Dillan White makes the most use of
scientiﬁc arguments. As in the other videos, the arguments are
kept short and easy to understand. Most of all he emphasizes the
amount of (plastic) garbage and that diﬀerent animals eat it and
die from it. He uses a very strong visual language, showing, on the
one hand, the beautiful landscape, which thereby appears worthy
of protection, and, on the other hand, the rubbish destroying
this image. So, his last argument is: “The sea is so beautiful.
And I personally want it to stay that way.” Likewise in the other
arguments, his statements, but also his facial expressions and
gestures suggest that he is much concerned by the subject, e.g.,
when he arrives at the garbage dump in scene 8: “And to look
at this is just mega, mega gross” (TC: 01:17). His argumentation
is based on the concrete examples of pollution, which are shown
in the video and to which he takes a stance. He looks like he is
shocked by the extent of the pollution. His conclusion—similar to
the other two videos—wants to make the audience think, without
putting them under pressure: It is “almost impossible to avoid
producing plastic waste.” But you could at least “be a little more
conscious about what you’re buying” (TC: 06:52).
Facial Expressions and Gestures
The facial expressions and gestures underline the argumentation
of all YouTubers, as described above, and convey the emotions
to the viewer. The facial expressions and gestures in video_nd
are more pronounced due to the music format. Sissi Kandziora
uses gestures the least. She talks calmly, matching the “sofa
atmosphere.” Dillan White, on the other hand, gestures more and
is also in his other videos more the slightly crazy, wacky type. He
also uses his gestures to stage himself, for example by spreading
his arms in the sunset (scene 1).
Comprehensibility
Language (Technical Terms, Everyday Language,
Complexity of Sentences)
In all three videos there are only three terms that can be described
as technical terms: “Fast fashion” (video_ts: TC: 04:02), “beach
clean-ups” (video_dw: TC: 02:11) and “microplastics” (video_dw:
TC: 02:30; 04:02). The ﬁrst one is not directly explained in the
video but is understandable from the context of what is being
said: “You keep buying more and more and more. As a result,
at some point, the wardrobe will overﬂow or the whole thing
will be disposed of in no time. Fast fashion” (video_ts: TC:
03:55-04:03). “Beach-Clean-Up” can be easily translated into the
German “Strandreinigung” even with little knowledge of English.
On the other hand, this term is also explained by the context and
the images. Microplastics are mentioned twice in the video and
explained in detail the second time.
The use of everyday language by the YouTubers includes
deletions (“hab” instead of “habe” [have], “n” instead of “ein”
[a]), clitics (merging of two words, e.g., “geht’s”), ﬁller words
(“ähm” [um]) as well as grammatical adjustments to the standard
language (e.g., sentence order in the subordinate clause: “Weil ich
habe das gemacht.” [because I did this]). In addition, colloquial
terms such as “Karnickel” [pejorative for “rabbit”], “ratzfatz”
[roughly “quickly”] or “krass” [insane] are occasionally used. All
in all, this, together with the avoidance of technical terms and
foreign words, not only improves the comprehensibility, but also
the authenticity of the YouTubers, since their language is similar
to the language of the target group.
The sentence complexity is kept simple in all three videos.
The longest subordinate clause in video_nd consists of eleven
words: “[...] sagt mir, wie euch das Video gefallen hat und
wie ihr das fandet” [tell me how you liked the video and
how you perceived it] (TC: 05:04). Within the lyrics, the two
longest subordinate clauses each have only eight words. A large
part of the subordinate clauses consists of ﬁller words (in
italics in the example): “[...] weil ich sowas auch wirklich echt
scheiße ﬁnde” [because I also just really ﬁnd that crap] (TC:
03:36). Often there are also constructions with “und” as in the
ﬁrst example. Sissi Kandziora in particular uses a lot of main
sentences that she associates with “und”: “Wir leben komplett
über unseren Verhältnissen und ich seh momentan keine Grenze
[...] Deswegen wollt ich heut’einfach mal so n alltägliches Thema
wie Kleidung aufgreifen hier in meinem Video und Frau Iran [the
scientist] hat mir zum Beispiel auch eine Zahl genannt [...]” [We
are living completely beyond our means and I don’t see any limits
at the moment [...]. Therefore, I would like to pick up an everyday
topic such as clothing for my video and Mrs. Iran [the scientist]
for example also gave me some numbers] (video_ts: TC: 03:13-
03:28). Dillan White uses very few subordinate clauses and when
he does, they are kept short and simple.
Structure of the Videos
All three videos can be divided into the typical three main
parts intro, main part, and outro. At the beginning there is an
introduction where the topic and, if necessary, the location is
introduced. However, the music video by NiksDa represents a
special case. The greeting comes after the video and the theme
only becomes clear as the song progresses. In all three videos, the
scientiﬁc arguments are mentioned in the main part bit by bit. At
the end of video_nd and video_ts, the typical YouTube references
to links in the infobox for further information, the request to
viewers to write comments, and the outro take place. video_dw
dispenses with this and ends instead with a call to pay attention
to one’s plastic consumption. The clear and simple structure, that
is typical for the platform and the respective channel, supports
the comprehensibility of the videos.
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
10
December 2020 | Volume 5 | Article 601177


Kaul et al.
YouTube Case Study #EarthOvershootDay
Visualization Techniques
Neither video_dw nor video_nd does contain any graphics or
diagrams. In video_nd, the visualization is achieved primarily
through the acting persons themselves, through their facial
expressions and gestures as well as individual elements such as
the apple in scene 33 or the smartphone in scene 18, which
shows Sina’s proﬁle photo on the dating app Tinder including
two rabbits. In addition, the problem of meat consumption
is presented with some still images, e.g., from within a
slaughterhouse, in scene 50.
In video_ts, Sissi Kandziora uses some ﬂashbacks from earlier
videos to illustrate her past. Also excerpts from her Skype
interview with the scientist Samira Iran as well as animated
graphics lighten things up—so that Sissi’s face is not the only thing
visible the entire time as she said herself. This makes the video not
look boring, and the most important scientiﬁc arguments can be
clariﬁed by the graphics.
In video_dw, Dillan White worked mainly with landscape
images and images of the waste pollution on the beaches.
He also used aerial and underwater shots, opening up
dimensions to the viewer that usually are not visible. In
all three videos, the visualizations serve to support what is
being said and do not diverge from the verbal message, thus,
enhancing comprehensibility.
Storytelling
In all three videos, forms of storytelling are used, but in diﬀerent
ways. Niklas Kolorz unfolds the theme of meat consumption
with his song entirely within the framework of a story. The
topic is thus personalized from the perspective of the two main
protagonists who meet for a rendezvous. Typical for storytelling
is also the depiction of a conﬂict. The two have diﬀerent opinions,
with which the viewers may identify. Niklas Kolorz and Sina
express their emotions intensively through facial expressions and
gestures (e.g., frowning, sad face, waving their hands). The choice
of words and their emphasis also convey the emotions in the
story, for example, through the use of strong language: “I have
never eaten this shit again since I heard about this statistic”
(TC: 01:46; the emphasis here is underlined, as in the following
examples). The repetition at min. 03:44 (“If nobody acts, climate
change will win in this country”) emphasizes the importance
of this statement. Especially the ﬁnal sentence in the last verse
“I hope you know what that means” (TC: 04:02) in connection
with the following pictures (pigs in the slaughterhouse, globe,
harvesting machine in the ﬁeld) and sounds (scene 50) indicate
the desired emotionalization, whereby rapid picture changes and
the black screen at the end take on a dramatizing function.
Screeching pigs and the sound of knife blades are reminiscent of
the sounds of a slaughterhouse—an indication that animals must
die in agony for human consumption. The scientiﬁc arguments
mentioned are all concrete examples and some of them are
additionally illustrated. Niklas Kolorz, for example, holds out
a plate of sliced apples to Sina and says: “I can serve you the
apple and you can eat it down to the last morsel. But a chick
with feathers and ﬁbers and a brain, you eat only packaged and
breaded” (TC: 02:10-02:17). Due to the format, the audience is
only involved at the end, after the song is over and Niklas Kolorz
calls on the audience in the outro to look at the description for
more information, discuss in the comments, and subscribe to
the channel.
Video_ts is not telling a story with ﬁctional protagonists.
Instead, Sissi Kandziora talks in a conversational tone about her
personal view on the subject, incorporating her past into the story
and describing her experiences. Thus, personalization is also used
here, albeit diﬀerently than in the ﬁrst video. Sissi Kandziora
does not express her emotions through facial expressions and
gestures as much as in video_nd. However, this would not ﬁt
into her video format, in which she appears more like a calm
person. Nevertheless, it becomes obvious that the topic seems
important to her. Thus, at the beginning of the video, she says
twice that she has dealt with the topic very intensively (TC:
00:09 and 00:52). She explains that she thinks a lot about what
she really likes and that she is now also paying attention to the
sustainability aspect. Her emotions are particularly evident in her
evaluations in the form of so-called verbal quantiﬁers (in italic),
which she particularly emphasizes or repeats: “And it is just
insane,” “how much we just consume,” “I think it is just insane
how we deal with it,” “[...] you keep buying more and more and
more” (TC: 03:11-04:12). Unlike the other two YouTubers, Sissi
Kandziora doesn’t use music or sounds. Of the three, she involves
the audience the most. Already in the introduction, she asks
the audience for comments: “I am [...] always super grateful for
your tips and suggestions, your opinions” (TC: 01:38). She always
addresses her viewers directly when giving tips, and uses concrete
examples, which she partly links to her own experience and which
young people could implement in their everyday life, for instance:
“The most sustainable way would be to give an existing garment
another life, for example by shopping in a second-hand store
or getting something from your friend or out of your mom’s
wardrobe. As in my case: ...” (TC: 05:35).
In video_dw, the storytelling unfolds from the reportage-like
style. Dillan White takes the viewer with him on his journey
and shares his experiences and emotions on-site when visiting
the landﬁll and collecting garbage with the WWF youth. He
also uses emotionalizing verbal quantiﬁers such as “unbelievable,”
“rad,” “mega,” or “disgusting” when evaluating the situations on-
site. Moreover, similar to Niklas Kolorz, he uses many gestures
to express his emotions while describing his experiences, as in
scene 23, when he reports what he has seen underwater during
his dive. When he says “that’s not even that cool” not only his
voice seems sad, but also his facial expression. Dillan White
emphasizes the beauty of the sea at several points and visualizes
this with numerous shots. Right at the beginning, he welcomes
the audience “here in this incredible scenery” (TC: 00:19). At
the same time, the problem is also visualized—not only by the
pictures of the plastic garbage on the beach but also by Dillan
White showing his garbage at the end of the video, which
he produced during the week. The viewer sees, for example,
what a landﬁll looks like on-site and how much rubbish is on
beaches and in the sea. The wording and the images create a
communication context that can evoke emotions in the viewers.
Dillan White quite rarely involves the audience directly, only
once he says: “Maybe it’s something for your next beach holiday”
(TC: 02:13) about the beach clean-ups. At the end of the video, he
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
11
December 2020 | Volume 5 | Article 601177


Kaul et al.
YouTube Case Study #EarthOvershootDay
calls on his viewers to do something for the environment at home
and gives them some concrete tips on what they could do to be
more conscious about what they buy.
Summary of the Video Analysis
Regarding the category of authenticity, it was found that the
videos were designed to ﬁt the respective channel concept in
terms of language, setting, and argumentation, and only the
subject matter diﬀers from the usual videos of the respective
channel. Each video thus has an individual character. Sissi
Kandziora always uses the same greeting and goodbye in her
videos. Her channel is characterized by a positive mood and
motivation. Niklas Kolorz has translated his passion for music
into his video and Dillan White combines his message with
his love of traveling and stages himself and the landscapes as
he usually does. So, there is a continuity with respect to the
corresponding channels in all videos, the YouTubers remain
true to their way of communicating and their values. Not too
many scientiﬁc arguments are mentioned and named arguments
are not simply strung together but are set in relation to the life
world of the viewers, e.g., with vivid examples. The YouTubers
clearly show their conviction of the topic they present through
their argumentation and expressions of personal opinions. All
YouTubers nevertheless use an argumentation that also allows
other points of view. Gestures and facial expressions underline
the arguments and emotions, appropriate to the respective
situation and person.
The language and presentation in the videos, which are
familiar to young people, also make them easier to understand.
The dimensions of comprehensibility (simplicity, structure,
brevity, and stimulating features) are considered (to varying
degrees) in all three videos. A simple language with few technical
terms and a comprehensible structure is used. All videos are
shorter than 10 min. Besides, an appealing visual design and the
integration of the scientiﬁc arguments into the everyday life of
young people support comprehensibility. Involving the audience
did not play a major role in the videos, but the viewers were
addressed directly, at least during the opening of the video and
the outlook at the end.
In all three videos forms of storytelling are present. Niklas
Kolorz makes the most use of storytelling by staging his video
as a date in a restaurant. Sissi Kandizora uses her own story
to convey the video’s message and emphasizes verbally how
important it is to her. Lastly, Dillan White takes the viewers on
his personal journey to discover the problem of plastic garbage at
Croatia’s beaches.
Reaction of Viewers—Comment Analysis
The views can serve as a ﬁrst indicator for the reception of the
videos. The video of NiksDa received roughly 40% more views
than the average views on his channel. Both other videos received
considerably fewer views than the respective average views on
their channels (Typisch Sissi−60%, dillan white -80%).
At the same time all videos received considerably more likes
than dislikes on YouTube (see Table 1). NiksDa’s video has a ratio
of about 33 likes to one dislike, while the ratio is for Typisch Sissi
at about 39 and for dillan white about 249).
FIGURE 2 | Categorization of viewer’s comments on the three case study
videos with respect to the topic choice.
In order to get a more in-depth impression of the reception of
the three videos by the viewers, a quantitative content analysis
of the comments, excluding comments by the Youtubers, was
conducted. Overall, the video by NiksDa received by far the most
comments (n = 1,039) followed by dillan white (n = 214) and
Typisch Sissi (n = 78). Although not equal, this ratio (13:3:1) is
roughly following the pattern of overall views for the three videos
(8:2:1) and the overall likes (15:5:1—see Table 1).
Discussions—indicated by replies to other comments—can
be found primarily in the comments to NiksDa’s and Typisch
Sissi’s videos. The former got 270 replies (26% of all comments
belonging to the video), whereas the latter got 19 replies—
a relatively low absolute number but nevertheless 24.4% of
the 78 comments to the video. The video of dillan white
only received.
Further analysis of the contents is focusing on three aspects:
topic choice, comprehensibility, and presentation style. While the
analysis is quantitative nevertheless some exemplary comments
are quoted to give the reader a better impression of the data.
Topic Choice
The topic choice is mentioned in between 23.3% (video_nd) and
47.7% (video_dw) of the comments to all three videosAlmost all
comments addressing topic choice are positive, appreciating that
the YouTubers picked up the topics (see Figure 2), exempliﬁed
by the following comments:
“Very cool video and I think the message deﬁnitely got
across. And brave of you to make a video about this topic
because it is very controversial. Respect.” (Comment ID
Ugz89_wLH7xauE9_YS94AaABAg on video_nd)
“Wow mega exciting and important video, super informative,
a lot I did not know yet;-) I did not know the day yet
either! I think it’s great that you draw attention to this
topic and make me think about it:-) [...]” (Comment ID
UgzOuYi4AD_upuT_1gx4AaABAg on video_ts)
“i just think it is so great of you to use the reach you have
to address such important issues thank you” (Comment ID
Ugy_ijFh-D7yKB-REfV4AaABAg on video_dw)
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
12
December 2020 | Volume 5 | Article 601177


Kaul et al.
YouTube Case Study #EarthOvershootDay
FIGURE 3 | Categorization of viewer’s comments on the three case study
videos with respect to the comprehensibility.
Only the video of NiksDa also received a relevant small
amount (2.2%) of negative comments-−23 in total, whereas both
other videos only received one negative comment. This might
be attributed to the topic itself, with vegetarianism/veganism
directly inﬂuencing personal preferences and life decisions,
and thereby also causing emotional counter-reactions, as the
following exemplary comment illustrates:
“then eat salad and do not annoy everyone with the stuﬀ”
(Comment ID UgysNL1OyvhJOsBzwIZ4AaABAg on video_nd)
This interpretation is corroborated by several comments,
which were not coded as negative with respect to the
topic choice according to the scheme, but which display
ironic or provocative wording regarding personal food choices
[e.g., “And now a big schnitzel or two” (Comment ID
UgzY5yFERXumqH3NjRB4AaABAg on video_nd)].
In contrast to previous studies (Shapiro and Park, 2015)
the comments primarily stayed with the topic focus of the
video, which might be explained with primarily followers of the
channels commenting and not people who found the video when
searching for a speciﬁc scientiﬁc or societal topic.
Comprehensibility
Comprehensibility is the aspect out of the three aspects analyzed
mentioned the least by viewers with only 6% of all comments
addressing it. The aspect is most commonly mentioned in the
video of Sissi Kandziora, with 18% of the comments there,
whereas for the other two videos only 6% (video_nd) and 3%
(video_dw) of the comments mention this aspect.
Also, here, if comments address the issue, they are primarily
positive like in the following illustrative quotes from the
comments on the three videos:
“Insane how you can put so much information into such
a good song much of it I didn’t know about it [...]”
(Comment ID Ugx5VlaQaaaYHO-k5pF4AaABAg on video_nd)
“So great that you make so many videos about sustainability &
you never get the feeling that it must be very diﬃcult
”
Comment ID UgxGd5qwQp3oBzKoaxh4AaABAg on video_ts)
FIGURE 4 | Categorization of viewer’s comments on the three case study
videos with respect to the presentation style.
“Great
video,
great
content,
explanations
etc.
[...]”
(Comment ID Ugz6eQRHY_-5RXShERx4AaABAg on video_dw)
Only very few comments (0.75%) criticize the comprehensibility
of the videos and can be found—with one exception—exclusively
in the comments to NiksDa’s video. However, since the absolute
numbers of negative or negative in combination with positive
comments are even lower than for the topic choice, no further
conclusions can be drawn from that (see Figure 3).
Presentation Style
The presentation style is mentioned in 31% of comments to the
three videos, also here primarily positively. The aspect is mainly
found in the comments to video_nd (34%), followed by video_ts
(24%) and video_dw (22%) predominantly in a positive way:
“Important
topic
pretty
well-presented.
Great
song
and
just
awesome
<3”
(Comment
ID
Ugx-UHhrXsQ1wn7NQON4AaABAg
on video_nd)
“ Sooo a great video. Both on the information level, but
also incredibly aesthetic! Gladly more about the topic <3”
(Comment ID UgwFmbFUNEunazPRorB4AaABAg on video_ts)
“[...] Your videos are totally awesome. Top
you even
learn something! It’s good that you can also deal with such
topics
and
integrate
them
well
into
your
videos.
[...]”
(Comment
ID
UgzcE1WzATDVHvCcsXB4AaABAg
on video_dw)
As for topic choice, also here the only exception is the video
of NiksDa receiving 2.3% negative and 3.3% negative as well as
positive comments (see Figure 4). This could be explained by the
fact that the overall concept as a music video is more unique
and contains more pronounced style elements and at the same
time is prone to judgments by aesthetic preferences of viewers.
The direction of the comments classiﬁed as negative supports this
interpretation—many address music ﬂaws:
“Triple oscillator does not ﬁt in and ﬂow errors. Typical ‘youtuber
music”’
(Comment
ID
UgyLYSmsMpx_CQ0TFa94AaABAg
on video_nd)
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
13
December 2020 | Volume 5 | Article 601177


Kaul et al.
YouTube Case Study #EarthOvershootDay
In summary, the comment analysis supports the impression one
gets when looking at the like-to-dislike ration: All three aspects
looked at—topic choice, comprehensibility and presentation style
were predominantly positively received in the comments when
mentioned. This indicates that the deviation from the channels’
usual topics did not undermined their authenticity.
Discussions in the comments—measured by the number of
replies to other comments and indicating a more thorough
examination of the content—could only be found in larger
numbers for NiksDa’s video and with lower absolute numbers
for Typisch Sissi’s video. This might be explained by the greater
controversy of NiksDa’s topic in contrast to the other two videos,
as well as, by the request for feedback at the end of both videos,
which is missing in dillan white’s case.
While we did not analyze the content of the discussion beyond
the three categories above, the coders gained the impression that
the discussion about NiksDa’s video focused on topical aspects
while the ones about Typisch Sissi’s video were more concerned
with the exchange of concrete tips—which would correspond to
the respective requests made by the YouTubers at the end of
the videos.
CONCLUSION
Summary of Results
In accordance with the results of previous studies (Breuer, 2012,
105 f.), this analysis corroborates the ﬁnding that authenticity
plays a central role in the presentation of science web videos,
especially when established YouTubers are presenting scientiﬁc
content that is not part of their regular repertoire. The YouTubers
of the three analyzed videos of the case study have selected
their topics in a cooperative approach with the team and
thereby presumably were able to select aspects according to their
authentic interest. In two of the videos, the YouTubers also made
explicit connections to their personal experiences and critically
reﬂected them (speciﬁcally fashion consumption and traveling).
Furthermore, each video was presented in an individual and,
thus, authentic setting, style and storytelling approach that ﬁts
the respective inﬂuencer and the corresponding communities.
The three YouTubers used speciﬁc youth language only to a
limited degree and stayed with their usual everyday language.
In general, the language and structure of the videos are simple
and comprehensible, the included scientiﬁc arguments focus on
selected aspects and are tied to examples from everyday life.
The comments analysis shows that this approach in general
was successful at least to some degree. However, one has to
consider that only one out of the three videos reached more
viewers than the average viewers per video for the channel.
Still, the comments regarding the topic choice and presentation
style have primarily been positive with almost no criticisms
for all three videos, which suggests that the viewers of the
videos are a self-selected sample of the fans of the channels
more interested in the respective topic. The comprehensibility
of the videos was mentioned relatively rarely in the comments,
albeit predominantly positive, which is in line with a low-
threshold approach of science communication that does not put
information density upfront.
The overall results tie in with the results of an evaluation of the
previous project “DU HAST DIE MACHT” [YOU HAVE THE
POWER]. There the young people interviewed also praised the
authenticity and comprehensibility of the contributions, which
was important for all young people, regardless of the type of
school they attended (Besand et al., 2013, 84, 65f.). It also
became apparent that videos—especially those with individual
statements by peers—are more popular than texts, especially
among secondary school students (Besand et al., 2013, 61, 74).
However, the desire for a dialogue between scientists,
YouTubers and young people, which also was stated as a goal by
the project team, could not be realized in the campaign. While
the YouTubers were to a limited degree in a dialogue with the
young people through the commentaries, direct communication
between scientists and young people via YouTube comments did
not take place besides isolated instances. This was also expressed
as a point of criticism by the project team itself during the
interviews (TH). Discussions in the comments could generally
only be found for one of the videos.
In addition, it can also be concluded that solitary videos
on science and environmental topics within the channels of
inﬂuencers, as it was the case with the #EarthOvershootDay
campaign, are not suﬃcient to reach the target group lastingly,
which also the producers of the campaign have found (NK,
SK). For this it might be necessary to address the topic more
substantially (Humm and Schrögel, 2020, 10) as other inﬂuencers
have done on their own accord. One example is Louisa Dellert,
who started as a ﬁtness inﬂuencer and now regularly addresses
politics, sustainability and environmental issues (Herrmann,
2020). While such a “transition” might bear the risk of losing
some of the followers who might dislike the changed scope
of topics, the marginal rate of negative comments regarding
topic choice in our sample somewhat mitigates this assumption.
Furthermore, the YouTubers themselves actively consider this
issue, as Sissi Kandziora stated in the interview: “I take the
viewers with me for many years and many know from the phase
when I did a lot of shopping and many also rethink through
my channel.”
Limitations of the Case Study
Although the ﬁndings of the case study analysis are in line with
theoretical expectations and previous empirical works, wider
reaching conclusions can only be drawn tentatively. Due to the
design of the study with a focus on the material and production
level, no information on the actual reception of the videos and
the eﬀects on viewers (e.g., learnings, changes in opinion and
perspectives and impact on actual behavior) could be gathered
besides the limited comment analysis.
The socio-demographics and especially the educational
background of the actually reached audience could not be
assessed reliably. The interviews with the producers and the
analysis of the comments did not lead to any indications that
the audience diﬀered from the typical channel audience of the
inﬂuencers, but there is also no veriﬁed information on the exact
composition of these typical audiences beyond the assessment by
the YouTubers themselves.
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
14
December 2020 | Volume 5 | Article 601177


Kaul et al.
YouTube Case Study #EarthOvershootDay
Outlook
It would be a worthwhile endeavor for future studies to ﬁll the
knowledge gaps listed in the limitations above: a more detailed
analysis of the actual audiences as well as a more detailed analysis
of reception processes and learning eﬀects (short-term as well as
long-term including eﬀects on behavior change).
Looking at the practical implications for science and
environmental
communicators,
our
ﬁndings
encourage
cooperation
with
inﬂuencers
on
social
media
to
reach
new audiences beyond the proverbial choir. Although the
composition of the reached audience could not be empirically
assessed, it is a plausible assumption that non-scientiﬁc
inﬂuencers on YouTube (in contrast to speciﬁc science
inﬂuencers like Mai-Thi Nguyen Kim in Germany) have
a diﬀerent—i.e., less academic—audience compared to the
channels of academic institutions. The general guidelines on
engaging with underserved audiences identiﬁed in an earlier
review can also be applied to this context: “Starting with
listening (1), reducing the distance (2), relevance for everyday
life (3), going where people are (4), cooperation (5), and
implementing long-term activities (7)” (Humm and Schrögel,
2020, 10). The missing sixth recommendation would be the
“openness paradox” (stating that mandating active participation
might build additional barriers), which seems less relevant for
existing online communities, such as followers of YouTube
channels, with an established discussion culture—another
advantage of working with inﬂuencers who already built a
community. Applied speciﬁcally to the online context, these
recommendations translate to: start with listening and do not just
assume interests and previous knowledge (1), choose accessible
channels, language and presentation style (2), relevance for
everyday life including societal and political participation (3),
choose established platforms [and keep an eye on TikTok (Hayes
et al., 2020)] (4), cooperate in an authentic partnership with
inﬂuencers (5), and establish longer (and mutually beneﬁcial)
partnerships with communities and inﬂuencers (7).
Nevertheless, working with inﬂuencers is no “all-purpose
tool” with guaranteed success. This is illustrated by the below
average number of views for two of the three videos, which might
indicate that they did not resonate too well with the typical
audience of the channels despite the many likes and positive
comments on the videos. However, the comments as well as
the like ratio were predominantly positive. While the chosen
methods do not allow for any conclusions about how intensively
the viewers engaged with the video’s topics, the fact that a quarter
of the comments for two videos were replies, might indicate such
an engagement took part at least partly.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be
made available by the authors, without undue reservation.
ETHICS STATEMENT
Ethical review and approval was not required for the study
on human participants in accordance with the local legislation
and institutional requirements. The participants provided their
written informed consent to participate in this study. Written
informed consent was obtained from the individual(s) for the
publication of any potentially identiﬁable images or data included
in this article.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
PS devised the project. LK developed the approach and
conducted the study as her Bachelor’s thesis, supervised by PS. PS
and CH conducted the comment analysis and provided feedback
on the study. LK, PS, and CH wrote the manuscript. All authors
contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.
FUNDING
We acknowledge support by the KIT-Publication Fund of the
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology. The research project Science
was funded by the Robert Bosch Foundation.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fcomm.
2020.601177/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
Alexa (2020). Alexa-Top sites. Available online at: https://www.alexa.com/topsites
(accessed June 26, 2020).
Allgaier, J. (2016). “Wo Wissenschaft auf Populärkultur triﬀt,” in Web
Video
Wissenschaft–Ohne
Bewegtbild
läuft
nichts
mehr
im
Netz:
Wie
Wissenschaftsvideos
das
Publikum
erobern,
eds
T.
Körkel,
and
K.
Hoppenhaus
(Heidelberg:
Spektrum
der
Wissenschaft),
15–24.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-658-12898-2_13
Allgaier,
J.
(2017).
“Wissenschaft
und
Populärkultur,”
in
Forschungsfeld
Wissenschaftskommunikation, eds H. Bonfadelli, B. Fähnrich, C. Lüthje, J.
Milde, M. Rhomberg, and M. S. Schäfer (Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien
Wiesbaden), 239–250.
Allgaier, J. (2019). Science and environmental communication on YouTube:
strategically distorted communications in online videos on climate change and
climate engineering. Front. Commun. 4:36. doi: 10.3389/fcomm.2019.00036
Allgaier, J. (2020). Rezo and German climate change policy: the inﬂuence of
networked expertise on YouTube and beyond. Media Commun. 8, 376–386.
doi: 10.17645/mac.v8i2.2862
Altendorfer, L.-M. (2019). Inﬂuencer in der digitalen Gesundheitskommunikation:
Instagramer,
YouTuber
und
Co.
zwischen
Qualität,
Ethik
und
Professionalisierung.
Baden-Baden:
Nomos
Verlag.
doi: 10.5771/9783845299785
Archer, L., DeWitt, J., Osborne, J., Dillon, J., Willis, B., and Wong, B. (2012).
Science aspirations, capital, and family habitus: how families shape children’s
engagement and identiﬁcation with science. Am. Educ. Res. J. 49, 881–908.
doi: 10.3102/0002831211433290
Bahlo, N., Becker, T., Kalkavan-Aydin, Z., Lotze, N., Marx, K., Schwarz,
C., et al. (2019). Jugendsprache: Eine Einführung. Stuttgart: J.B. Metzler.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-476-04767-0
Basch, C. H., Fung, I. C.-H., Hammond, R. N., Blankenship, E. B., Tse, Z.
T. H., Fu, K.-W., et al. (2017). Zika virus on YouTube: an analysis of
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
15
December 2020 | Volume 5 | Article 601177


Kaul et al.
YouTube Case Study #EarthOvershootDay
english-language video content by source. J. Prev. Med. Public Health 50,
133–140. doi: 10.3961/jpmph.16.107
Besand, A., Birkenhauer, P., and Lange, P. (2013). Politische Bildung in digitalen
Umgebungen. Eine Fallstudie zum Projekt DU HAST DIE MACHT. Available
online
at:
http://www.bosch-stiftung.de/sites/default/ﬁles/publications/
pdf_import/Politische_Bildung_in_digitalen_Umgebungen.pdf
(accessed
November 20, 2017).
Boy, B. (2020). “Audio-visuelle Wissenschaftskommunikation im Internet,”
in Science-Slam: Multidisziplinäre Perspektiven auf eine populäre Form
der
Wissenschaftskommunikation,
eds
P.
Niemann,
L.
Bittner,
C.
Hauser, and P. Schrögel (Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien), 225–247.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-658-28861-7_12
Breuer,
S.
(2012).
“Über
die
Bedeutung
von
Authentizität
und
Inhalt
für
die
Glaubwürdigkeit
von
Webvideo-Formaten
in
der
Wissenschaftskommunikation,” in Öﬀentliche Wissenschaft und Neue Medien:
die Rolle der Web 2.0-Kultur in der Wissenschaftsvermittlung, eds C. Y.
Robertson-von Trotha, J. Muñoz Morcillo, and M. Ianniello (Karlsruhe: KIT
Scientiﬁc Publ). Available online at: https://publikationen.bibliothek.kit.edu/
1000031053/2363277 (accessed November 1, 2020).
Brown,
D.,
and
Hayes,
N.
(2008).
Inﬂuencer
Marketing:
Who
Really
Inﬂuences
Your
Customers?
Oxford:
Butterworth-Heinemann.
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-7506-8600-6.50010-0
Calmbach, M., Borgstedt, S., Borchard, I., Thomas, P. M., and Flaig, B. B. (2016).
Wie ticken Jugendliche 2016? Lebenswelten von Jugendlichen im Alter von 14
bis 17 Jahren in Deutschland. Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-658-12533-2
Dahlstrom, M. F. (2014). Using narratives and storytelling to communicate science
with nonexpert audiences. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, 13614–13620.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1320645111
Dahlstrom, M. F., and Scheufele, D. A. (2018). (Escaping) the paradox of scientiﬁc
storytelling. PLOS Biol. 16:e2006720. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.2006720
Ekram, S., Debiec, K. E., Pumper, M. A., and Moreno, M. A. (2019). Content
and commentary: HPV vaccine and YouTube. J. Pediatric Adolesc. Gynecol. 32,
153–157. doi: 10.1016/j.jpag.2018.11.001
Feierabend, S., Rathgeb, T., and Reutter, T. (2020). JIM-Studie 2019-Jugend,
Information, Medien. Basisuntersuchung zum Medienumgang 12- bis 19-
Jähriger. Stuttgart. Available online at: https://www.mpfs.de/ﬁleadmin/ﬁles/
Studien/JIM/2019/JIM_2019.pdf (accessed June 24, 2020).
Femers-Koch,
S.
(2018).
“Abweichung
vom
allgemeinen
Sprachniveau:
Jugendsprache
als
Varietätentyp
in
der
Wirtschaftskommunikation,”
in
Textspiele
in
der
Wirtschaftskommunikation:
Texte
und
Sprache
zwischen
Normierung
und
Abweichung,
eds
S.
Femers-Koch
and
S.
Molthagen-Schnöring
(Wiesbaden:
Springer
Fachmedien),
111–145.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-658-18899-3_6
Früh, W., Frey, F., and Blümler, J. (Eds.). (2014). Narration und Storytelling:
Theorie und empirische Befunde. Köln: Herbert von Halem Verlag.
Geipel, A. (2018). “Wissenschaft@YouTube,” in Knowledge in Action Wissen,
Kommunikation und Gesellschaft, eds E. Lettkemann, H. Knoblauch, and
R. Wilke (Wiesbaden: Springer VS), 137–163. doi: 10.1007/978-3-658-18
337-0_6
Global Footprint Network (2020). Earth Overshoot Day 2020. Earth Overshoot
Day. Available online at: https://www.overshootday.org/ (accessed October 16,
2020).
Hayes, C., Stott, K., Lamb, K. J., and Hurst, G. A. (2020). “Making every second
count”: utilizing TikTok and systems thinking to facilitate scientiﬁc public
engagement and contextualization of chemistry at home. J. Chem. Educ. 97,
3858–3866. doi: 10.1021/acs.jchemed.0c00511
Herrmann, K. (2020). Instagram-Einsatz für Nachhaltigkeit und Selbstliebe.
Der Tagesspiegel. Available online at: https://www.tagesspiegel.de/berlin/
inﬂuencerin-luisa-dellert-instagram-einsatz-fuer-nachhaltigkeit-und-
selbstliebe/25869798.html (accessed August 29, 2020).
Hopf, C., and Schmidt, C. (1993). Zum Verhältnis von Innerfamilialen Sozialen
Erfahrungen,
Persönlichkeitsentwicklung
und
politischen
Orientierungen:
Dokumentation und Erörterung des Methodischen Vorgehens in Einer Studie zu
diesem Thema. Hildesheim: SSOAR.
Horkheimer, M., and Adorno, T. W. (2006). Dialektik der Aufklärung:
philosophische
Fragmente.
16.
Auﬂage.
Frankfurt
am
Main:
Fischer
Taschenbuch Verlag.
Humm,
C.,
and
Schrögel,
P.
(2020).
Science
for
all?
Practical
recommendations on reaching underserved audiences. Front. Commun.
5:42. doi: 10.3389/fcomm.2020.00042
Humm, C., Schrögel, P., and Leßmöllmann, A. (2020). Feeling left out:
underserved audiences in science communication. Media Commun. 8:164.
doi: 10.17645/mac.v8i1.2480
Hussain, M. N., Tokdemir, S., Agarwal, N., and Al-Khateeb, S. (2018).
“Analyzing disinformation and crowd manipulation tactics on YouTube,”
in
2018
IEEE/ACM
International
Conference
on
Advances
in
Social
Networks
Analysis
and
Mining
(ASONAM)
(Barcelona),
1092–1095.
doi: 10.1109/ASONAM.2018.8508766
Jebe,
F.,
Konietzko,
S.,
Lichtschlag,
M.,
and
Liebau,
E.
(2019).
Jugend/YouTube/Kulturelle Bildung. Horizont 2019. Essen: Rat für Kulturelle
Bildung e. V. Available online at: https://www.rat-kulturelle-bildung.de/
ﬁleadmin/user_upload/pdf/Studie_YouTube_Webversion_ﬁnal.pdf (accessed
November 1, 2020).
Kandziora, S. (2020). Arbeite mit mir–Statistiken und Zielgruppe. Typisch Sissi.
Available online at: https://typischsissi.de/arbeite-mit-mir/ (accessed August 7,
2020).
Krachten,
C.
(2016).
“Die
Erfolgsfaktoren
für
Online-Video,”
in
Web
Video Wissenschaft–Ohne Bewegtbild läuft nichts mehr im Netz:
Wie
Wissenschaftsvideos das Publikum erobern, eds T. Körkel and K. Hoppenhaus
(Heidelberg: Spektrum der Wissenschaft), 25–32.
Kuckartz,
U.
(2018).
Qualitative
Inhaltsanalyse:
Methoden,
Praxis,
Computerunterstützung, 4th Edn. Weinheim Basel: Beltz Juventa.
Lang, A. (2000). The limited capacity model of mediated message processing. J.
Commun. 50, 46–70. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2000.tb02833.x
Langer, I., Schulz von Thun, F., and Tausch, R. (2011). Sich verständlich
ausdrücken. München: Reinhardt.
Lauter, R. (2018). Orientierung in der Informationsﬂut. Wissenstransfer von
TV-Nachrichten zu komplexen Themen. Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien
Wiesbaden. doi: 10.1007/978-3-658-19833-6
Lloyd, R., Neilson, R., King, S., and Dyball, M. (2012). Review of Informal Science
Learning, Wellcome Trust. Available online at: https://wellcomelibrary.org/
item/b21247213#?c=0andm=0ands=0andcv=0 (accessed February 20, 2018).
Lou, C., and Yuan, S. (2019). Inﬂuencer marketing: how message value
and
credibility
aﬀect
consumer
trust
of
branded
content
on
social
media.
J.
Interact.
Advert.
19,
58–73.
doi:
10.1080/15252019.2018.15
33501
Marris,
E.
(2019).
Why
young
climate
activists
have
captured
the
world’s
attention.
Nature
573,
471–472.
doi:
10.1038/d41586-019-0
2696-0
Marschalek, I., and Schrammel, M. (2017). Soziale Inklusion durch und in
Wissenschaftskommunikation.
Studie
zur
Situation
von
marginalisierten
Kindern und Jugendlichen in Wien. Available online at: http://www.rat-fte.
at/tl_ﬁles/uploads/Studien/Publikationen/INKLUSIO%20ENDBERICHT_
FINAL.pdf (accessed December 7, 2017).
MESH Collective (n.d.) Website MESH Collective. Available online at: https://
www.meshcollective.de/ (accessed August 14, 2020).
Metten, T., Niemann, P., Pinkas-Thompson, C., and Rouget, T. (2016).
“Was zeichnet eigentlich ein wissenschaftliches Webvideo aus?” in Web
Video Wissenschaft–Ohne Bewegtbild läuft nichts mehr im Netz:
Wie
Wissenschaftsvideos das Publikum erobern, eds T. Körkel, and K. Hoppenhaus
(Heidelberg: Spektrum der Wissenschaft), 94–116.
Milde,
J.
(2009).
Vermitteln
und
Verstehen.
Zur
Verständlichkeit
von
Wissenschaftsﬁlmen
im
Fernsehen.
Wiesbaden:
VS
Verlag
für
Sozialwissenschaften. doi: 10.1007/978-3-531-91630-9
Muñoz Morcillo, J., Czurda, K., and Robertson-von Trotha, C. Y. (2016a).
“Eine Typologie der Wissenschaftskommunikation auf YouTube and Co,” in
Web Video Wissenschaft–Ohne Bewegtbild läuft nichts mehr im Netz: Wie
Wissenschaftsvideos das Publikum erobern, eds T. Körkel, and K. Hoppenhaus
(Heidelberg: Spektrum der Wissenschaft), 117–127.
Muñoz Morcillo, J., Czurda, K., and Robertson-von Trotha, C. Y. (2016b).
Typologies of the popular science web video. J. Sci. Commun. 15, 1–32.
doi: 10.22323/2.15040202
Muñoz Morcillo, J., Czurda, K. K., Geipel, A., and Trotha, C. R. (2019). Producers
of popular science web videos–between new professionalism and old gender
issues. Int. J. Market. Commun. N. Media 7, 72–98. Available online at: http://
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
16
December 2020 | Volume 5 | Article 601177


Kaul et al.
YouTube Case Study #EarthOvershootDay
u3isjournal.isvouga.pt/index.php/ijmcnm/article/view/438 (accessed October
8, 2020).
Neuland, E. (2018). Jugendsprache: Eine Einführung. Stuttgart: UTB.
Paolillo, J. C. (2018). The ﬂat earth phenomenon on YouTube. First Monday 23.
doi: 10.5210/fm.v23i12.8251
Pettie, E. (2019). Quarterly YouTube Trends Snapshot: Sustainability Culture.
YouTube Trends. Available online at: https://youtube-trends.blogspot.com/
2019/04/quarterly-youtube-trends-snapshot.html (accessed June 29, 2020).
Rennie, L. J. (2014). “Learning science outside of school,” in Handbook of Research
on Science Education, Volume II, eds N. G. Lederman, and S. K. Abell (New
York, NY; London: Routledge), 134–158.
Robert Bosch Stiftung. #EarthOvershootDay - eine YouTube-Kampagne über das
Leben in den Grenzen des Planeten. Available online at: https://www.bosch-
stiftung.de/de/projekt/earthovershootday-eine-youtube-kampagne-ueber-
das-leben-den-grenzen-des-planeten/im-detail (accessed August 11, 2020).
Schäfer, M. S. (2017). “Wissenschaftskommunikation Online,” in Forschungsfeld
Wissenschaftskommunikation, eds H. Bonfadelli, B. Fähnrich, C. Lüthje, J.
Milde, M. Rhomberg, and M. S. Schäfer (Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien
Wiesbaden), 275–293. doi: 10.1007/978-3-658-12898-2_15
Schrögel, P., Humm, C., Leßmöllmann, A., Kremer, B., Adler, J., and Weißkopf,
M. (2018). Nicht erreichte Zielgruppen in der Wissenschaftskommunikation:
Literatur-Review zu Exklusionsfaktoren und Analyse von Fallbeispielen. Berlin:
Karlsruhe. Available online at: https://nbn-resolving.org/urn:nbn:de:0168-
ssoar-66846-1 (accessed June 7, 2018).
Seeger, C., and Kost, J. F. (2018). Inﬂuencer Marketing: Grundlagen, Strategie und
Management. Stuttgart: UTB.
Shapiro, M. A., and Park, H. W. (2015). More than entertainment: YouTube and
public responses to the science of global warming and climate change. Soc. Sci.
Inf. 54, 115–145. doi: 10.1177/0539018414554730
Sood, G. (2020). Tuber. Access YouTube From R. Available online at: https://
soodoku.github.io/tuber/ (accessed November 1, 2020).
Thomas, G., and Durant, J. (1987). “Why should we promote the public
understanding of science?,” in Scientiﬁc Literacy Papers, ed M. Shortland
(Oxford: Univ. of Oxford Dept. for External Studies), 1–14.
von Kempis, F. (2016). “Über die Inﬂuencer zur Zielgruppe,” in Web
Video Wissenschaft–Ohne Bewegtbild läuft nichts mehr im Netz:
Wie
Wissenschaftsvideos das Publikum erobern, eds T. Körkel and K. Hoppenhaus
(Heidelberg: Spektrum der Wissenschaft), 33–41.
Wahlström, M., Kocyba, P., de Vydt, M., and De Moor, J. (Eds.). (2019). Protest for
a Future: Composition, Mobilization and Motives of the Participants in Fridays
For Future Climate Protests on 15 March, 2019 in 13 European Cities. Keele
University. Available online at: https://eprints.keele.ac.uk/6571/ (accessed July
12, 2020).
Weingart, P. (2011). “Die Wissenschaft der Öﬀentlichkeit und die Öﬀentlichkeit
der Wissenschaft,” in Wissenschaft und Hochschulbildung im Kontext von
Wirtschaft und Medien, eds B. Hölscher, and J. Suchanek (Wiesbaden:
VS
Verlag
für
Sozialwissenschaften),
45–61.
doi:
10.1007/978-3-531-
92648-3_4
Welbourne, D. J., and Grant, W. J. (2016). Science communication on YouTube:
factors that aﬀect channel and video popularity. Public Underst. Sci. 25,
706–718. doi: 10.1177/0963662515572068
Wissenschaft im Dialog (2018). Wissenschaftsbarometer 2018. Ergebnisse nach
Subgruppen.
Available
online
at:
https://www.wissenschaft-im-dialog.de/
ﬁleadmin/user_upload/Projekte/Wissenschaftsbarometer/Dokumente_18/
Downloads_allgemein/Tabellenband_Wissenschaftsbarometer2018_ﬁnal.pdf
(accessed June 24, 2020).
Xiao, M., Wang, R., and Chan-Olmsted, S. (2018). Factors aﬀecting YouTube
inﬂuencer marketing credibility: a heuristic-systematic model. J. Media Bus.
Stud. 15, 188–213. doi: 10.1080/16522354.2018.1501146
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
The Robert Bosch Foundation independently funded both the research project
Science for All as well as the #EarthOvershootDay campaign. Julia Althoﬀfrom
MESH Collective served in an unpaid role on the scientiﬁc advisory board of
Science for All.
Copyright © 2020 Kaul, Schrögel and Humm. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these
terms.
Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org
17
December 2020 | Volume 5 | Article 601177
