Linguistik online 70, 1/15  http://dx.doi.org/10.13092/lo.70.1743 
CC by 3.0 
How Can Semantic Annotation Help Us to Analyse the Discourse 
of Climate Change in Online User Comments?* 
Luke Collins (Nottingham) 
 
 
Abstract 
User comments in response to newspaper articles published online offer a unique resource for 
studying online discourse. The number of comments that articles often elicit poses many 
methodological challenges and analyses of online user comments have inevitably been 
cursory when limited to a manual content or thematic analysis. Corpus analysis tools can 
systematically identify features such as keywords in large datasets. This article reports on the 
semantic annotation feature of the corpus analysis tool WMatrix which also allows us to 
identify key semantic domains. Building on this feature, I introduce a novel method of 
sampling key comments through an examination of user comment threads taken from The 
Guardian website on the topic of climate change. 
 
 
 
 
1 
Introduction 
The user comments section that follows articles published by journalists online is one format 
of discussion that is publicly accessible and very popular in the U.K. User comments are 
enabled on the websites of all major newspapers in the U.K. and in order to contribute users 
need only complete a free online registration process (it is only The Times which requires a 
paid subscription). Though the timescale in which to make a contribution extends over just a 
few days and the comments are subject to moderation, the 'thread' is archived and remains 
publically viewable. Even in the space of a couple of days, articles often attract in excess of 
1000 comments and as such, provide a rich resource for the examination of attitudes and 
opinions around climate change.  
The amount of data generated online poses challenges for researchers to gather a more 
extensive account of such discussions across time, across formats, across media publications, 
even across individual articles. Previous research looking at online user comments has 
generally been based on manual content analysis and as such has been limited in the scope 
with which it can represent online debates (Manosevitch and Walker 2009; Milioni et al. 
2012; Coe et al. 2014). Such content analysis requires a very close reading of the data in order 
to construct a coding framework which is very demanding, given the size of the data. In 
addition, the method warrants multiple 'coders' to generate inter-rater reliability. Milioni et al. 
                                                 
* The author gratefully acknowledges funding from the Economic and Social Research Council, grant number: 
RES-062-23-1256. 


Linguistik online 70, 1/15 
ISSN 1615-3014 
44 
(2012: 29) describe a pre-coding pilot of separate data and state that they were limited to a 
sample of the full dataset they wanted to explore, which has implications for what can be 
extrapolated about the data set as a whole. Gabrielatos et al. (2012: 171) assert that the 
examination of electronic web-based texts requires "the development of techniques which can 
deal with the complexity that such data expose the analyst to". 
Due to the size of the available data when examining user comments online it is natural to 
consider a computer-assisted analysis. Researchers might adopt a 'corpus-based approach' 
(Tognini-Bonelli, 2001) whereby they look to validate, refute or refine a pre-conceived idea 
about the dataset. Alternatively, we can use corpus analysis software to take a corpus-driven 
(Tognini-Bonelli, 2001: 85) or a 'data-driven' approach whereby: "decisions on which 
linguistic features are important or should be studied are made on the basis of information 
extracted from the data itself" (Rayson, 2008: 521). This is not to say that this is an entirely 
inductive approach, since pre-existing ideas about language categorisation must be present in 
the programming of the software that annotates the data. Annotation is, in itself, a process of 
adding interpretive, linguistic information to data collected as a corpus (Leech, 1997). In this 
paper I use the WMatrix corpus analysis tool developed at Lancaster University 
(http://ucrel.lancs.ac.uk/Wmatrix/), which offers a predetermined framework that can be 
applied consistently across data types. Its annotation features are explored below. 
 
2 
Aims 
In this paper I demonstrate how semantic annotation can offer greater insights into online 
discourse than conventional keyword analysis. It is hypothesised that because semantic 
analysis of the data incorporates more individual terms it can provide a more comprehensive 
account of the key themes of the data compared to individual keyword analysis. Furthermore, 
building on the semantic annotation function of the corpus analytical software tool WMatrix, I 
introduce a novel method for identifying key comments within the thread, based on their 
containing the constituent words of those key semantic categories. This offers a form of 
sampling that would enable researchers to incorporate more data points into their analysis and 
examine user comments in more depth. I discuss the implications and limitations of this 
sampling technique, before considering how researchers might then go on to examine their 
sample in greater detail. 
 
3 
Methods 
 
3.1 
Data 
The Guardian has enabled readers to make comments online since March 2006 (cf. Hermida 
and Thurman 2008). A search was conducted through The Guardian website's archive from 
2006 until June 2013 for the term 'climate change'. According to the NRS Digital Print and 
Digital Data survey, The Guardian had the largest readership of what were termed the 
'Quality newspapers' (which included The Daily Telegraph, The Times, The Independent and 
The 
Financial 
Times) 
with 
6.4 
million 
visitors 
each 
month 
(cf. 
http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/ 
datablog/2012/sep/12/digital-ewspaper-readerships-national-survey?INTCMP=SRCH, 
accessed April 15, 2015). Though the topic is discussed in alternative terms such as 'global 


Luke Collins: How Can Semantic Annotation Help Us to Analyse the Discourse of Climate  
Change in Online User Comments? 
ISSN 1615-3014 
45
warming', 'climate change' was deemed to be more inclusive and a more prevalent term in the 
debate (cf. http://guardianlv.com/2014/05/climate-change-a-more-accurate-term-than-global-
warming/). A total of 30 752 articles from The Guardian were identified through the search 
term 'climate change'. The search showed that very few comments were made on articles 
relating to climate change before 2008. This may indicate some delay in the feature being 
taken up substantially by the readership or may be because there was originally a limit of 50 
comments set for each article. In order to test the semantic annotation function of WMatrix 
against the largest dataset the articles were sorted according to the greatest number of 
comments elicited and articles making only a passing reference to, for example, "Chris 
Huhne, Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change" were excluded. Thirty-three 
'climate change' articles from The Guardian website elicited 500+ comments, with the highest 
being 1679 comments. This demonstrates the depth of information available for conducting a 
longitudinal, cross-case comparison between articles and between newspapers. The top three 
ranking articles by number of user comments elicited were identified for analysis. Other 
researchers might consider alternative criteria such as the date, authorship, or source material 
in the gathering of their data. The three articles with the highest number of comments taken 
from The Guardian website can be seen in Table 1. 
Title 
Date 
Author 
Comments 
1. "That snow outside is what Global warming looks like" 
(http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2010/dec/2
0/uk-snow-global-warming?INTCMP=SRCH1) 
20th 
December  
2010 
George 
Monbiot 
1679 
2. "The climate denial industry is out to dupe the public. 
And it's working" 
(http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cif-
green/2009/dec/07/climate-change-denial-industry) 
7th  
December  
2009 
George 
Monbiot 
1422 
3. "Global warming rigged? Here's the e-mail I'd need to 
see" 
(http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cif-
green/2009/nov/23/global-warming-leaked-email-
climate-scientists) 
23rd  
November  
2009 
George 
Monbiot 
1296 
Table 1: Highest ranking articles by number of user comments 
Kehoe and Gee (2012) have examined the relationship between articles and their user 
comments threads, considering whether the threads can operate as an indicator of the 
'aboutness' of the original article. Furthermore, most newspapers have dedicated journalists 
who will publish material on specific topics and it is no surprise to find that the three articles 
identified here were written by the same author, George Monbiot. Here, there is potential to 
consider the role of the journalist and of the public (at least those who contribute to comments 
threads) in shaping the debate and whether the discussions actually relate to the original post 
or if they are simply another platform to have a broader discussion. This is something that 
would require close examination over a period of time and an analysis of a particular online 
community but will not be explored here. 
                                                 
1 Hyperlinks to online articles were last accessed April 15, 2015. 


Linguistik online 70, 1/15 
ISSN 1615-3014 
46 
From these three articles alone, a total of 4397 comments (approximately 484 000 words) was 
extracted. With the first of these articles, the first comment was submitted 5 minutes after the 
article was posted and the final comment was submitted nearly three full days afterwards. It 
would appear that soon after this the comments section was closed by the moderator. Based 
on the comments sections from the other articles, this seems to be a fairly typical timeframe in 
which users are given the opportunity to contribute. Some comments were removed by a 
moderator (95; 80; and 121 respectively), which on The Guardian website is identified with a 
standard message that also incorporates a link to the site's community standards 
(http://www.guardian.co.uk/community-standards) and FAQs (http://www.guardian.co.uk/ 
community-faqs, both accessed April 15, 2015), but which remain in the thread to indicate 
when they were posted and who posted them. We must be aware that this can affect our 
understanding of the public debate as it exists online, with nearly 10% of the comments made 
in response to the third article removed. This raises the question of the democratic potential of 
online user comments as a space for open discourse as traditional journalists grapple with 
maintaining a certain standard of debate in relation to their publication. There is evidence in 
the remaining comments that users have to consider the practice of moderation not only in 
what they go on to write but also where they post it, often referring to other blogs or forums 
with different moderation policies. 
 
3.2 
Keyness 
In adopting a corpus- or data-driven approach to determine what is of interest or significant 
within the data we attempt to capture its 'aboutness' as a matter of frequency (Scott 1999). 
More commonly, this is referred to as 'keyness', which Baker et al. (2008: 278) define as "the 
statistically significantly higher frequency of particular words or clusters in the corpus under 
analysis in comparison with another corpus". In this respect, what is 'key' to a text is 
determined by recurrent themes, ideas or concepts. This is in contrast to the way in which the 
term was used in the work of Williams (1983), where 'keywords' were identified as those 
words with some social, cultural or political significance. In its quantitative sense, 'keyness' is 
based on relative frequency and as such necessitates a comparison with a 'normal' frequency 
of words across a stretch of discourse. In corpus analysis this is determined by a reference 
corpus, which is traditionally a larger dataset suitably matched to the type of discourse under 
examination. Scott and Tribble (2006) were able to demonstrate that the process of 
determining keywords in a single dataset is fairly robust, by comparing Romeo and Juliet to 
various, increasingly obscure reference corpora. However, Culpepper (2009: 35) maintains 
that "the closer the relationship between the target corpus and the reference corpus, the more 
likely the resultant keywords will reflect something specific to the target corpus". WMatrix 
has the British National Corpus (BNC) built in to its software, offering both spoken and 
written language data as well as a number of subdivisions of this larger corpus determined by 
the context in which the data was captured (business, education and leisure, for example). The 
BNC comprises 100 million words used in spoken and written language. The reference corpus 
used by the WMatrix tool uses a smaller sample of its written data containing 968 267 words. 
There is no sub-corpus that specifically comprises computer-mediated discourse however and 
we must have consideration for discourse features that could be determined by this online 


Luke Collins: How Can Semantic Annotation Help Us to Analyse the Discourse of Climate  
Change in Online User Comments? 
ISSN 1615-3014 
47
format. Since the comments under examination seemed to retain a written style the BNC 
written sampler was used as the reference corpus. 
The default statistical measure for determining keyness in WMatrix is log-likelihood. 
There are a number of statistical measures that can be applied to determine keyness, such as 
Pearson's chi-squared and Fisher's Exact Test, however log-likelihood is the preferred 
measure (for a more in-depth survey, see Rayson, 2003). Log-likelihood can be thought of as 
a measure of 'difference'. It is calculated through a contingency table which takes into account 
the frequency of the word in relation to the total number of words in the corpus and compares 
those to the corresponding values in a reference corpus (for a full account of the calculation 
see Rayson 2008). Log-likelihood is presented as a number, the value of which indicates the 
'difference' to the reference corpora in that a value of zero indicates a perfect match. A 
negative value indicates that the word is under-represented in the target corpus and a positive 
value indicates that the word occurs more often than 'normal'. Furthermore, the higher the 
value the more significant the difference, with the following critical values: 
 A log-likelihood value of 3.84 represents a p-value of <0.05. 
 A log-likelihood value of 6.63 represents a p-value of <0.01. 
 A log-likelihood value of 10.83 represents a p-value of <0.001. 
 A log-likelihood value of 15.13 represents a p-value of <0.0001. 
Keywords are generally presented in a frequency table. The critical values provide some 
justification for setting a cut-off for the number of keywords to investigate, or the researcher 
can set a specific p-value, as in WordSmith (Scott 2007). What has been observed however, is 
that although in most scientific disciplines a p-value of 0.05 is more than satisfactory, even at 
a p-value of 0.001 the researcher is left with a great number of words to investigate (Berber 
Sardinha 1999). Subsequently, the researcher must rely on alternative means of establishing a 
cut-off point. Berber Sardinha (1999: 4) suggests extracting a majority, i.e. half the total 
keywords plus one. This is one of the issues Rayson (2008) cites in support of a semantic 
category analysis, where there will be fewer items as words are collected in groups. He also 
argues that this type of grouping would promote low-frequency words that individually might 
be overlooked, in instances where they belong to a key semantic category. Wilson (1993: 3) 
remarks upon the limitation of a word-based frequency count in that "people also tend to 
repeat the same concept within a discourse in somewhat different words through the use of 
virtual synonyms or the negation of a positive attribute". Thus, if a speaker wanted to testify 
to the size of something they might use a combination of 'large', 'big' and 'massive', the 
quantitative effect of which would be lost in a single word frequency table. Though there may 
be fewer categories, the researcher might still want to consider the constituent words 
individually. Ultimately, this offers a different kind of keyness and a different representation 
of the text, as will be seen below. 
 
3.3 
Keywords in context 
Researchers very rarely comment upon keywords in isolation, but refer to the context in 
which they occur by looking at concordance lines and considering features such as 


Linguistik online 70, 1/15 
ISSN 1615-3014 
48 
collocation, which identifies "statements of the habitual or customary places of [a] word" 
(Firth 1968: 181). Grundmann and Krishnamurthy (2010) analyse collocations using 
WordSmith in their international examination of climate change discourse in traditional 
newspapers. Collocation is referred to here to mean the above-chance frequent co-occurrence 
of two words within a pre-determined span (i.e. three/four/five words on either side of the 
word under investigation (Hoey 1991). They report a contrast between the use of neutral 
collocates of '[climate] change' in the U.S. press (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change, research, scientists, for example) and the collocation of action items in the U.K. 
press (tackling, combat, threat and levy), which is also observed in the German and French 
press (Grundmann/Krishnamurthy 2010: 128) (see also similar results using multidimensional 
scaling in Nerlich et al. 2012). They also report a general trend in the U.S. of discussing 
climate change at a national level (through the words state, people, president and Bush), 
compared to the more international framing of the debate in the U.K. press 
(Grundmann/Krishnamurthy, 2010: 124). Researchers have also explored 'semantic prosody', 
as a type of extended collocation that is "spread over a unit of language which potentially 
goes well beyond the single orthographic word" (Partington 2004: 132). This does provide 
more contextual information than singular keywords, as well as an indication of the semantic 
fields that are associated with keywords. However, this process of analysis still relies on 
specific terms being used and would not be sensitive to the use of near-synonyms or 
alternative phraseology. In order to determine the different meanings of homonyms 
grammatical or semantic annotation is required. Corpus analysis software can distinguish 
between the noun and verb forms of stick for example, through grammatical annotation. 
Similarly, with semantic annotation such tools can distinguish the bark of a dog from that of a 
tree. 
Koteyko et al. (2013) explored user comments on articles to do with climate change extracted 
from The Daily Mail website and manually identified a sub-corpus based on the word 
'science', which was identified as a keyword. They were able to examine the role of science 
and scientists in the climate change debate by looking at references to 'science' in context 
(primarily through concordance lines). Other researchers such as Bassi (2010) have conducted 
a manual categorisation of keywords into semantic categories to look at the broader themes 
around the Kyoto protocol. The WMatrix semantic tagging system collates all members of the 
'word family' (Bauer/Nation 1993) 'science' (scientist, scientific etc.) as well as other science-
related terms (such as physics, nuclear, experiment) within a single category in a more 
comprehensive way than Koteyko et al. (2013) had done manually. This enables researchers 
to consider a sub-corpus in isolation or in comparison to other such categories. 
 
3.4 
Semantic annotation and key categories 
Corpus analysis software such as WMatrix can annotate data for its grammatical and semantic 
components. Part-of-speech (POS) tagging assigns each word a grammatical label. From the 
grammatical annotation of a word and the words around it the software can then separate the 
semantic meaning of homographs. WMatrix (http://ucrel.lancs.ac.uk/Wmatrix.html) is a 
corpus analysis tool that was developed at the University Centre for Computer Corpus 
Research on Language (UCREL) by Paul Rayson as part of the Reverse Engineering of 
Requirements to support business process change (REVERE) project (Rayson et al. 2000). 


Luke Collins: How Can Semantic Annotation Help Us to Analyse the Discourse of Climate  
Change in Online User Comments? 
ISSN 1615-3014 
49
The POS-Tagging system built in to WMatrix is the Constituent Likelihood Automatic Word-
tagging System (CLAWS) and has been continuously developed since the early 1980s 
(Garside 1987). This system contains a lexicon of words and multi-word units (e.g. such_as, 
given_that) as well as a list of suffixes to help identify unknown words. A full exploration of 
its features, as well as a tutorial in using the software can be found here: 
http://ucrel.lancs.ac.uk/Wmatrix3.html.  
Following the standard POS-tagging, the WMatrix software also conducts semantic 
annotation, with its unique built-in UCREL Semantic Analysis System (USAS). This tagging 
system allocates each word of the data into one of 21 major discursive fields (for the full list 
see: http://stig.lancs.ac.uk/wmatrix3/semtags.html). An example of how the data is tagged by 
WMatrix is shown in Table 2 which is provided by the WMatrix webpage 
(http://ucrel.lancs.ac.uk/annotation.html#POS, both accessed April 15, 2015): 
Grammatical Tag (CLAWS) 
 
Semantic Tag (USAS) 
PPIS1 1st person sing. subjective 
personal pronoun (I) 
I 
Z8 Pronouns 
VV0 base form of lexical verb 
(e.g. give, work) 
like 
E2+ Like 
AT1 singular article 
(e.g. a, an, every) 
a 
Z5 Grammatical Bin 
JJ General adjective 
particular 
A4.2+ Detailed 
NN1 singular common noun 
(e.g. book, girl) 
shade 
O4.3 Colour and Colour Patterns 
IO of 
(as preposition) 
of 
Z5 Grammatical Bin 
NN1 singular common noun 
(e.g. book, girl) 
lipstick 
B4 Cleaning and Personal Care 
 
 
Table 2: CLAWS and USAS tagging 
This process is automated however the user does have the capacity to review alternative tags 
to those words where meaning can be ambiguous. The software provides a string of 
alternative tags in order of descending probability, which is informed by its built-in 
dictionaries. For example, in the construct 'a single man' the tagging system locates 'single' in 
the category of 'Quantities'. The system also offers 'Not part of a group', 'Relationship: 
Asexual' and 'Vehicles and transport on land' (presumably in reference to a single decker bus 
or ticket). In each case the software has identified 'single' as an adjective and offered the most 
common use of the term, to mean: individual, solitary, lone. This emphasises the importance 
of continually adding to the templates that inform these tools to provide more accurate 
accounts of language in use. 


Linguistik online 70, 1/15 
ISSN 1615-3014 
50 
Other methods of semantic tagging include: LIWC (Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count) 
(Tausczik/Pennebaker 2010); WordNet (Fellbaum 1998); and UKB (Agirre et al. 2009). 
However, LIWC does not carry out word disambiguation by drawing on the context of the 
word in the manner described above. WordNet is able to conduct semantic disambiguation but 
does not categorise closed-class words such as pronouns, prepositions and conjunctions. The 
WMatrix CLAWS and USAS have high reported figures for accuracy (96–97% and 91% 
respectively) (Wilson 1993; Rayson et al. 2004). Piao et al. (2004) demonstrated that the 
USAS can account for 99.39% of the BNC spoken data and 97.59% of the BNC written data. 
Other research has shown that the CLAWS and USAS can effectively account for the 
linguistic features of historical English texts (for example, Archer et al. 2003). Culpepper 
(2009) however had some problems in analysing individual characters' idiolects because of 
the change in semantic meaning of particular words from the sixteenth century. We may be 
critical of the reported 91% accuracy of the USAS however these percentages can be 
improved with the continued addition of more data and it was found to have a higher accuracy 
in its application here (see below). 
 
3.5 
Applications of the USAS 
For the most part, applications of WMatrix and its USAS have been conducted within the 
research 
team 
at 
Lancaster 
University 
where 
it 
was 
developed. 
Rayson 
(http://ucrel.lancs.ac.uk/Wmatrix3.html) demonstrates how the USAS can be used to offer a 
comparative analysis of the Liberal Democrat and Labour party manifestoes for the 2005 
General Election. Other researchers have also applied the semantic tagging system in 
comparative analyses of two texts, such as Murphy (2006) in the analysis of Shakespearean 
soliloquies; Kaur (2010) in analysing the themes that characterise Malaysian boys' and girls' 
creative writing; and Potts and Baker (2012) in comparing the cultural differences between 
British and American English over time. Cheng and Lam (2013) use WMatrix's semantic 
annotation feature to compare Western and Chinese media representations of Hong Kong over 
time, during and after the transfer of sovereignty. L'Hôte and Lemmens (2009) effectively 
demonstrate that semantic tagging offered insights beyond referring to keywords around ideas 
of 'newness' in their analysis of New Labour manifestoes.  
The use of WMatrix across research domains demonstrates its utility as a ready-made 
analytical tool but we must be critical of accepting the USAS categorisation framework as 
standard. In most cases, researchers used the semantic tagging as a preliminary step in their 
analysis before examining the findings in more depth. In the examples given above the 
researchers do not challenge the boundaries of the USAS categories but it is worth 
considering how certain readings of the text are privileged by such a system. Culpepper 
(2009) applied the USAS to the speech of specific characters in Romeo and Juliet and was 
able to report patterns identified by the software that were not intuitive or easy to predict but 
seemed "well-motivated". For example, we may not be conscientious of a high use of 
conjunctions at a numerical level but when this is made known through frequency lists it may 
validate our reception of the style. This showed that there are insights that can be offered by 
such computational approaches that might not be apparent to us on first reading but which 
seem agreeable when supported by numerical data. Culpepper (2009: 55) does however state 
that the advantages afforded by semantic tagging appear to favour ideational categories of 


Luke Collins: How Can Semantic Annotation Help Us to Analyse the Discourse of Climate  
Change in Online User Comments? 
ISSN 1615-3014 
51
language. This observation refers to Halliday's (1994) 'metafunctions', indicating that the 
semantic tagging process is less suited to providing insights into textual and interpersonal 
categories beyond those afforded by standard keyword analysis.  
 
3.6 
Identifying 'key comments' 
Each full discussion thread was tagged separately by WMatrix.  The comment 'signature', 
which includes the users 'name', an avatar (if chosen), a timestamp for the comment and a 
tally of recommendations, was removed so that only the content offered by the user was 
included. This did include citations of other comments, which creates the potential for a lot of 
repetition but since it is the user's choice to incorporate that content into their own message, it 
remains an important aspect of their contribution. User comments taken from The Guardian 
website generally maintained a conventional written structure and as such, the BNC written 
sampler was used as the reference corpus. This produced the frequency tables identifying 
keywords and key categories. 
Though the USAS tagging system does draw on grammatical and semantic information from 
the context of the word to achieve semantic disambiguation, returning to observe keywords in 
context allows us to investigate further aspects of style. In order to view the constituent words 
in context they were tagged in the original discussion thread. Each semantic category was 
coded with a different colour so that the distribution of concepts was visible on the page. The 
words were coded using Microsoft Word's 'Replace' function. This was largely an automatic 
process in that the software is able to locate each instance of the given word and reformat the 
font style of each occurrence. However, since the word processor does not have the 
annotation of WMatrix it can identify only orthographic forms. As such, it is unable to 
distinguish between those instances of the word relevant to the semantic category in question 
and those that are not. This required manual checking. Given that WMatrix already has the 
function to view a particular word in the context of the entire file and highlights the word in 
blue, this problem could be overcome if multiple words could be highlighted in one 
presentation of the file. WMatrix can of course distinguish occurrences of the word relevant 
to the semantic category in the way that a word processor is unable to do, making this another 
process of the methodology that could potentially be completed automatically by WMatrix. 
Once the tagging was complete I was able to visually observe each occurrence of the words 
within the top ten categories in their original context. In this way, we can view sequentially 
how particular topics converge and the density with which they co-occur. There are 
similarities here with the dispersion plot feature of WordSmith, which gives a visual 
indication of the degree to which keywords are localised or well-distributed across a text 
(Scott 2007). We can view each post as a micro-unit of analysis that has clear parameters. 
This is not to say that the posts exist in isolation, since they are of course part of a longer 
cohesive thread. But nor do they adhere to a strict linearity, since posts are often directly 
aimed at other contributions that appeared some time before in the sequence. Commenters 
often made a series of points within the parameters of a single post, the inference being that 
they incorporated all of the dimensions of the discussion that they deemed to be appropriate 
and relevant at that point in the discussion thread. Thus the comments should not be 
understood as 'turns' in the way that conversation analysis understands each contribution and 
the sequence of utterances in this online format does not strictly adhere to the linearity of 


Linguistik online 70, 1/15 
ISSN 1615-3014 
52 
other types of discourse. This principle requires further investigation but for the purposes of 
this study each comment was taken as a cohesive unit. 
The next phase of this method was to extract a sample. Since semantic annotation was able to 
identify key semantic categories in the data the sample was to be determined by key themes. I 
began by locating those comments that engaged with those key themes i.e. that incorporated 
those key categories. Such a sample is by no means representative of the full treatment of 
each concept within the discussion. Nor is it representative of the participants of the debate, of 
this particular thread in this particular publication, let alone the wider public discourse. What 
this extraction process did provide was a much smaller sample of comments that allowed us 
to observe how those key semantic categories operated in relation to one another. In setting 
the criterion that comments incorporated all ten of the key semantic categories I identified a 
particular subsection of the discussion which considered the 'full picture'. In such comments, 
users necessarily offered a much broader perspective on the discourse. This seemed to be a 
suitable starting point to get an initial sense of the prevalent themes in the debate and how 
they were seen in relation to one another. The researcher might take any number of those ten 
key semantic categories (or more) and consider more specific relationships between any 
number of them: 'science' and 'weather' for example. Unsurprisingly, the comments which 
included all ten categories were much longer than the average. This process therefore, favours 
those who make more substantial contributions, as a longer comment is more likely to 
incorporate more of the key semantic categories. The dual effect is that those more substantial 
contributions will have a greater effect on what those key semantic categories are, simply by 
constituting a larger part of the data. 
 
4 
Analysis 
 
4.1 
Manual correction 
The semantic tagging process did require some manual correction. Those words which were 
reallocated were almost exclusively assigned into the category 'Z99 Unmatched', indicating 
that the software simply did not recognise them. These words generally fell into three types: 
compound adjectives; groups of people within the debate characterised by their beliefs; and 
personal names. The compound adjectives (factory-produced, low-power, god-shaped, 
eleven-dimensional, coal-fired, carbon-containing, coal-powered, carbon-neutral, bio-
fuelled) in some cases were reallocated to the category 'W5 Green Issues' but for the most part 
belonged in the category 'O4.1 General appearance and physical properties'. The names for 
groups of people within the climate debate based on their beliefs (warmists, denialists, 
catastrophists, armageddonist, doomsayers) were generally reallocated into either 'X2.1 
Thought/belief', 'W5 Green Issues' or 'S5+ Belonging to a group'. The unique usernames used 
by commenters (Bluecloud, gourdonboy, jbowers, georgecoldwell, macsporan, lovelock, 
HypatiaLee) were generally re-allocated into the category 'Z1 Personal Names'. 
These usernames are characteristic of online discourse in that commenters rarely use their 
given names. This demonstrates a kind of creativity as part of an online persona but can also 
be seen as part of the online disinhibition effect (Suler 2004), where individuals are in many 
ways less accountable for what they post. Since they are unlikely to have appeared in the 
reference corpus a keyword analysis is likely to identify these unusual names as significant, 


Luke Collins: How Can Semantic Annotation Help Us to Analyse the Discourse of Climate  
Change in Online User Comments? 
ISSN 1615-3014 
53
even with a low occurrence. This is similar to Scott's (2007) observation of a text about horse 
racing wherein the horse's names would be quite incidental to the story but would gain 
statistical significance with very few mentions. They are correctly identified by the software 
as (proper) nouns and thus allocated to the 'Z' semantic category, but the software does not 
recognise which subcategory is appropriate. Personal names – particularly those used online – 
demonstrate a great degree of creativity and as such, are likely to require some degree of 
manual tagging in order for their semantic quality to be properly recognised. 
Ideally, there would not be any words tagged in this 'Unmatched' category but the ever-
changing nature of language and creativity of those who use it means it is unlikely that we 
will be able to account for every word within a text through computer programming. If the 
researcher is content with the USAS's reported 91% accuracy it may be sufficient to simply 
reallocate those words that have remained 'Unmatched'. The number of corrections in the 
'Unmatched' category was minimal in relation to the size of the overall corpus: 1146 of 60931 
tags (1.88%) for the first thread, 3138 of 164810 tags (1.90%) for the second thread and 1497 
of 81200 (1.84%) tags for the third thread. Despite only accounting for those tags assigned to 
the 'Unmatched' category, these figures are well within the range reported in the literature. 
Nevertheless, in the first user comment thread manual correction elevated the significance of 
the category 'Z3 Other personal names' to appear as one of the top ten categories. This 
category was elevated from a log-likelihood value of -3.44 (i.e. underused) to +814.46 and a 
similar elevation was evident in the other two comment threads. Had manual correction not 
been applied, the category 'O1.3 Substances and materials: Gas' (which included the words 
CO2, air, gas, methane etc.) would have appeared in the top ten categories for the first thread. 
 
4.2 
Keywords and key categories 
The top ten keywords for each user comment thread are represented in Table 3. 
 
Thread #1 
Thread #2 
Thread #3 
1. 
climate 
climate 
science 
2. 
warming 
data 
climate 
3. 
global 
warming 
warming 
4. 
AGW 
science 
data 
5. 
weather 
that 
scientists 
6. 
science 
global 
global 
7. 
winters 
you 
emails 
8. 
is 
is 
you 
9. 
you 
scientists 
CO2 
10. 
change 
CO2 
AGW 
Table 3: Top ten keywords for each comment thread 
Since the articles were identified through the search term 'climate change' it tells us little that 
in the user comments discussion, 'climate', 'change', 'global', 'warming', 'AGW' 
(Anthropogenic Global Warming), 'weather' and even 'winters' occurred more frequently than 
'normal'. The high occurrence of 'science' was also no surprise since it is central to the debate. 
'Is' and 'you' (which was found in all 3 lists) are used with such frequency and variety that it is 


Linguistik online 70, 1/15 
ISSN 1615-3014 
54 
difficult to interpret their use, though we may infer a preoccupation with a current state of 
affairs, of what 'is' and what 'is not'. Similarly, we might infer a prevalent dialogic style, 
though 'you' is often used in its universal and non-specific sense (i.e. 'one'). Ultimately, three 
sets of ten words alone offered a very narrow perspective of the defining features of this 
discussion. 
The top ten semantic categories from the user comment threads following manual correction 
can be seen in Table 4. 
 
Thread #1 
Thread #2 
Thread #3 
1. 
W4 Weather 
Y1 Science and technology in 
general 
Y1 Science and 
technology in general 
2. 
O4.6+ Temperature: Hot/On 
Fire 
X2.2 Knowledge 
A5.2+ Evaluation: True 
3. 
Y1 Science and technology in 
general 
A5.2+ Evaluation: True 
X2.2 Knowledge 
4. 
A5.2+ Evaluation: True 
Z3 Other proper names 
Z3 Other proper names 
5. 
Z3 Other proper names 
W4 Weather 
Z8 Pronouns 
6. 
O4.6- Temperature: Cold 
Z6 Negative 
W4 Weather 
7. 
A3+ Existing 
A3+ Existing 
A3+ Existing 
8. 
A2.2 Cause & 
Effect/Connection 
Z8 Pronouns 
Z6 Negative 
9. 
O4.6 Temperature 
O1.3 Substances and materials: 
Gas 
O1.3 Substances and 
materials: Gas 
10. 
Z6 Negative 
O4.6 Temperature 
X2.1 Thought, belief 
Table 4: Top ten key semantic categories from user comments thread 
Choosing the top ten categories may seem quite arbitrary but given the high degree of 
significance at which these categories occurred there is little rationale for establishing a 
threshold. As indicated above, a log-likelihood value of 15.13 relates to a p-value of 0.001. In 
the first discussion thread the tenth most significant category had a log-likelihood of 606.07 
and the top semantic category a log-likelihood value of 2640.24. There is no question of the 
significance of the occurrence of words in these categories but it is the researcher's decision to 
establish parameters of what they take forward to the next stage of analysis.  
We can observe some consistency between the keywords and the key semantic categories 
from the words 'weather', 'climate' and 'winters' which come under the semantic category 'W4 
Weather'; and the occurrence of the words 'science' and 'temperature' with their respective 
semantic categories. In the first thread there were three separate categories concerned with 
'temperature'. This reflected both the content of the article, which considered how the 
presence of snow is a result of the changing weather system and can be attributed to more 
general changes in the climate; but also a tendency to discuss climate change as a rise or fall 
in temperature, incorporating the debate about the misnomer 'global warming'. The category 
of 'Science and technology' was shown to be very significant in all three lists, as was a 
preoccupation with 'evidence', 'facts' and 'truth' in the category 'A5.2+ Evaluation: True'. The 
category 'Cause and Effect' suggested that climate change is understood in terms of its 
potential causes and effects on, for example, the weather.  


Luke Collins: How Can Semantic Annotation Help Us to Analyse the Discourse of Climate  
Change in Online User Comments? 
ISSN 1615-3014 
55
In the same way that 'is' was a keyword, the category of 'Existing' was significant in all three 
threads. Similarly, the category, 'Negative', which included terms of negation such as 'not', 
'none', and 'neither' was significant in all three threads, reflecting a tendency for the 
discussions to be around what 'is' and what 'is not'. Koteyko et al. (2013) also found that 'not' 
was significant keyword in their analysis of user comments taken from the Daily Mail. In both 
cases this was often in reference to science and scientists, demonstrating that the question of 
the legitimacy of climate science and the practices of climate scientists are key in the climate 
change debate. This also supported the view that the debate is characterised by polarised 
opinions. The tendency to write in terms of what 'is' and what 'is not' reflected a claim 
followed by a counter-claim interaction, with little indication of mediation. The frequent use 
of personal names (apparent in the prominence of the category 'Z3 Other proper names' in all 
three threads) also attested to a degree of user interaction. 
For the most part, keywords were incorporated into one of the top semantic categories for 
each thread. Key categories offer a slightly different perspective on what characterised the 
discussion as a whole but still indicated which individual terms within those concepts were of 
significance. Semantic tagging allows us to speculate about broader patterns in the data but at 
this level we do not get accurate or specific details about how these key concepts operate in 
context. To refer to concordance lines would warrant a great deal of work, since there are 
multiple word units to consider within each category. The manual tagging of the words within 
the key semantic categories as described above allows us to observe the dispersion of those 
key concepts as well as identify key comments in the thread.  
 
4.3 
Key comments 
In the first discussion thread 17 of the 1679 comments (approximately 5 300 words out of an 
original 163 000) incorporated all ten of the key semantic categories. To give an example of 
the specificity of this approach, if we were to extract comments that exhibited any nine of the 
ten categories we would have a sample of 64 comments (16 500 words), which is nearly four 
times as many comments and three times as many words. Again, the individual researcher can 
adjust the parameters based on the size of the sample they are looking to extract but with a 
view to making multiple comparisons it is preferable to extract a smaller yet data-rich sample. 
The number of comments and word count for the data extracted at the parameters of 
incorporating eight or more of the top ten semantic categories for each thread are shown in 
Table 5. 
 
Original texts 
8 or more categories 
9 or more categories 
All 10 categories 
Thread 
Comm-
ents 
Wor
ds 
Comments 
Words 
Comm-
ents 
Words 
Comme-
nts 
Words 
#1 
1679 
163 
180 
159 
(9.47%) 
36 103 
(22.12%) 
64 
(3.81%) 
16 451 
(10.08%) 
17 
(1.01%) 
5 264 
(3.23%) 
#2 
1422 
182 
636 
154 
(10.83%) 
56 922 
(31.17%) 
56 
(3.94%) 
25 593 
(14.01%) 
20 
(1.41%) 
11 352 
(6.22%) 
#3 
1296 
138 
304 
172 
(13.27%) 
45 718 
(33.06%) 
68 
(5.25%) 
22 854 
(16.52%) 
16 
(1.23%) 
6 940 
(5.02%) 
Table 5 Number of comments and word count for key comment extraction 
From these three threads it was shown that by setting an inclusion criterion of all ten key 
categories I extracted a little over 1% of the comments, ranging from 3–6% of the total words. 


Linguistik online 70, 1/15 
ISSN 1615-3014 
56 
The actual word count between the threads ranged from 5264–11 352 but in total, fewer than 
25 000 words were taken forward for analysis. We might consider how this compares to an 
extraction process based on the top ten keywords: just two comments in the first discussion 
thread included all ten keywords and they were included in key comment extraction based on 
the top ten semantic categories. In the second thread, three comments included all ten 
keywords and in the third discussion thread, none of the comments incorporated all ten 
keywords. Again, the researcher must make a decision here as to what constitutes a suitable 
sample. Though the sample incorporating all ten key categories constitutes just ~1% of the 
overall comments we know that this particular 1% demonstrates how users are discussing the 
key themes of the discussion and that the identification of those key themes is statistically 
valid. In the first discussion thread, relaxing the criteria to include any eight of the top ten key 
semantic categories would extract a sample that numerically, represents 10% of the overall 
number of comments made. Determining the size of the sample will depend on the research 
question the researcher is looking to answer and the scope of data they are looking to include. 
 
5 
Discussion 
Semantic annotation identifies key categories and offers a different perspective on language 
data to keywords in large datasets where prevalent themes are discussed using multiple terms. 
In a discourse that is shown to be creative and in which terminology is continually evolving 
(from 'global warming' to 'climate change' for example) relying on specific terms can be 
limiting. Researchers interested in the climate change debate would not be surprised by the 
nature of the key semantic categories revealed in this data. But there is an indication that such 
analysis can help us understand what is really at the heart of such discussions. As a 
consideration of the effect of online journalism and the changing roles of journalists and their 
readership, such data can be examined to determine the ways in which users shape the content 
and focus of articles that are produced online. Equally, we can explore how the subject of the 
article can invoke thematic shifts in the broader discourse around climate change. Secko et al. 
(2011) explored the relationship between the 'core audience narrative' and the 'core journalist 
narrative' but acknowledged the limitations of the type of analysis, "not possible for the data 
set as a whole" (819). Identifying key semantic categories provides a more cursory account of 
both the article and its discussion thread, enabling researchers to conduct cross-case 
comparisons. 
This preliminary analysis of three user comment threads is not going to tell us anything about 
the nature of user comment threads in general, nor represent the discourse around climate 
change of those who comment on newspaper articles. As Scott (1997) has observed, such 
analysis does not serve to "characterise a language or a genre, but a language event". Online 
discussion threads are often dominated by a small number of contributors and are limited in 
how they represent public debates about climate change. In fact, in the first discussion thread 
for example, ten users posted 28% of the comments. By analysing the content and the 
reference to usernames, we find that equally those users with the highest numbers of 
comments were also the most often cited within the discussion: by reference to their username 
with the '@' prefix, for example. The implications of this aspect for the deliberative potential 
of such discussion threads are considered in Collins and Nerlich (2015).  
 


Luke Collins: How Can Semantic Annotation Help Us to Analyse the Discourse of Climate  
Change in Online User Comments? 
ISSN 1615-3014 
57
6 
Summary 
The identification of key categories through semantic annotation incorporated more of the 
detail of the data than basic keyword analysis. The key categories identified in the data were 
not surprising but did highlight more features of the debate than standard keyword analysis, 
such as the prevalence of the discussions around scientific evidence and causality, as well as 
the claim/counter-claim nature of the discussion. I introduced a method of identifying key 
comments based on semantic annotation that can be used to extract a sample and allow the 
researcher to look more closely at key categories in context. I have explained how at each 
stage of this process the researcher must make certain decisions and set parameters in 
determining the nature and size of their sample, which can be adjusted to reflect their research 
aims. Semantic annotation is comparable to the manual thematic analysis methods more 
traditionally implemented in the discourse-based exploration of such data, demonstrating how 
computational processes can be used to make such methods more data-driven. I would 
suggest that researchers build on the advantages that have been shown in its application, but 
nevertheless consider alternative categorisation systems that could be applied in a similarly 
computational manner in order to tackle the challenge of the breadth of online discourse data. 
 
References 
Agirre, Eneko et al. (2009): "A study on similarity and relatedness using distributional and 
WordNet-based approaches". In: Vanderwende, Lucy et al. (ed.) (2009): Proceedings of 
the 2013 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies. Atlanta: Association for Computational 
Linguistics: 19–27. 
Archer, Dawn et al. (2003): "Developing an automated semantic analysis system for Early 
Modern English". In: Archer, Dawn et al. (eds.) (2003): Proceedings of the Corpus 
Linguistics 2003 Conference. Lancaster University: 22–31. 
Baker, Paul et al. (2008): "A useful methodological synergy? Combining critical discourse 
analysis and corpus linguistics to examine discourses of refugees and asylum seekers in the 
UK press". Discourse & Society 19/3: 273–306. doi: 10.1177/0957926508088962. 
Bassi, Erica (2010): "A contrastive analysis of keywords in newspaper articles on the 'Kyoto 
Protocol'". In Bondi, Marina/Scott, Mike (eds.) (2010): Keyness in Texts. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins: 207–218 (= Studies in Corpus Linguistics 41). 
Bauer, Laurie/Nation, Paul (1993): "Word Families". International Journal of Lexicography 
6/4: 253–279. 
Berber Sardinha, Tony (1999): "Using keywords in text analysis: Practical aspects". DIRECT 
Working Papers 42. http://www2.lael.pucsp.br/direct/DirectPapers42.pdf, accessed April 
15, 2015. 
Cheng, Winnie/Lam, Phoenix (2013): "Western perceptions of Hong Kong ten years on: a 
corpus-driven Critical discourse study". Applied Linguistics 34/2: 173–190. doi: 
10.1093/applin/ams038. 
Coe, Kevin/Kenski, Kate/Rains, Stephen A. (2014): "Online and Uncivil? Patterns and 
determinants of incivility in newspaper website comments". Journal of Communication 
64/4. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jcom.12104/abstract, accessed April 15, 
2015. doi: 10.1111/jcom.12104. 


Linguistik online 70, 1/15 
ISSN 1615-3014 
58 
Collins, Luke C./Nerlich, Brigitte (2015). "Examining user comments for deliberative 
democracy: A corpus-driven analysis of the climate change debate online". Environmental 
Communication 9/2: 189–207. doi: 10.1080/17524032.2014.981560. 
Culpepper, Jonathan (2009). "Keyness: words, parts-of-speech and semantic categories in the 
character-talk of Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet". International Journal of Corpus 
Linguistics 14/1: 29–59. DOI: 10.1075/ijcl.14.1.03cul. 
Fellbaum, Christiane (ed.) (1998): WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. 
Firth, John (1968): "A synopsis of linguistic theory 1930-1955". In: Palmer, Frank (ed.) 
(1968): Selected Papers of J. R. Firth 1952–59. Bloomington: Indiana University Press: 1–
32. 
Gabrielatos, Costas et al. (2012): "The peaks and troughs of corpus-based contextual 
analysis." 
International 
Journal 
of 
corpus 
Linguistics 
17/2: 
151–175. 
doi: 
10.1075/ijcl.17.2.01gab. 
Garside, Roger (1987): "The CLAWS Word-tagging System". In: Garside, Roger et al. (eds.) 
(1987): The Computational Analysis of English: A Corpus-based Approach. London: 
Longman.  
Grundmann, Reiner/Krishnamurthy, Ramesh (2010): "The discourse of climate change: a 
corpus-based approach". Critical Approaches to discourse Analysis across Disciplines 4/2: 
113–133. 
Halliday, Mike (21994): An Introduction to Functional Grammar. London: Edward Arnold. 
Hermida, Alfred/Thurman, Neil (2008): "A clash of cultures: The integration of user-
generated content within professional journalistic frameworks at British newspaper 
websites". Journalism Practice 2/3: 343–356. doi: 10.1080/17512780802054538. 
Hoey, Michael (1991): Patterns of Lexis in Text. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Kaur, Sheena (2010): A corpus-driven contrastive study of girls' and boys' use of vocabulary 
in their free topic choice writing in Malaysia and the UK. Unpublished PhD thesis, 
Lancaster University. 
Kehoe, Andrew/Gee, Matt (2012): "Reader comments as an aboutness indicator in online 
texts: introducing the Birmingham blog corpus". Aspects of corpus linguistics: 
compilation, 
annotation, 
analysis. 
http://www.helsinki.fi/varieng/series/volumes/12/kehoe_gee/, accessed April 15, 2015. (= 
Studies in Variation, Contacts and Change in English 12). 
Koteyko, Nelya/Jaspal, Rusi/Nerlich, Brigitte (2013): "Climate change and 'climategate' in 
online reader comments: a mixed methods study". The Geographical Journal 179/1: 74–
86. DOI: 10.1111/j.1475-4959.2012.00479.x 
L'Hôte, Emilie/Lemmens, Maarten (2009): "Reframing treason: Metaphors of change and 
progress in New Labour discourse". Cognitextes 3. http://cognitextes.revues.org/248, 
accessed April 15, 2015. 
Leech, 
Geoffrey 
(1997): 
"Grammatical 
tagging". 
In: 
Garside, 
Roger/Leech, 
Geoffrey/McEnery, Tony (eds.) (1997): Corpus Annotation: Linguistic Information from 
Computer Text Corpora. London: Longman: 19–33. 
Manosevitch, Edith/Walker, Dana (2009): "Reader comments to online opinion journalism: A 
space of public deliberation". Paper presented at the 10th International Symposium on 
Online Journalism, 17–18th April, 2009. Austin, TX.  


Luke Collins: How Can Semantic Annotation Help Us to Analyse the Discourse of Climate  
Change in Online User Comments? 
ISSN 1615-3014 
59
Milioni, Dimitra/Vadratsikas, Konstantinos/Papa, Venia (2012): "'Their two cents worth': A 
content analysis of online readers' comments in mainstream news outlets". Observatorio 
6/3: 21–47. 
Murphy, Shane (2006): "Now I am alone: A corpus stylistic approach to Shakespearian 
soliloquies". In: Gabrielatos, Costas/Slessor, Richard/Unger, Johann W. (eds.) (2006): 
Papers from the Lancaster University Postgraduate Conference in Linguistics and 
Language 
Teaching 
1: 
66–85. 
http://www.ling.lancs.ac.uk/pgconference/v01/ 
Volume01.pdf, accessed April 15, 2015. 
Nerlich, Brigitte/Forsyth, Richard/Clarke, David (2012): "Climate in the news: How 
differences in media discourse between the US and UK reflect national priorities". 
Environmental Communication: A Journal of Nature and Culture 6/1: 44–63. doi: 
10.1080/17524032.2011.644633. 
Partington, Alan (2004): "'Utterly content in each other's company': Semantic prosody and 
semantic preferenc.". International Journal of Corpus Linguistics 9/1: 131–156. doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1075/ijcl.9.1.07par. 
Piao, Scott et al. (2004). "Evaluating lexical resources for a semantic tagger". In: Lino, Maria 
Teresa et al. (eds.) (2004): Proceedings of 4th International Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2004): 409–502. 
Potts, Amanda/Baker, Paul (2012): "Does semantic tagging identify cultural change in British 
and American English?". International Journal of Corpus Linguistics 17/3: 295–324. doi: 
10.1075/ijcl.17.3.01pot. 
Rayson, Paul (2003): Matrix: A statistical method and software tool for linguistic analysis 
through 
corpus 
comparison. PhD 
thesis, 
Lancaster 
University. 
http://ucrel.lancs.ac.uk/people/paul/publications/phd2003.pdf, accessed April 15, 2015. 
Rayson, Paul (2008): "From key words to key semantic domains". International Journal of 
Corpus Linguistics 13/4: 519–549. doi: 10.1075/ijcl.13.4.06ray. 
Rayson, Paul et al. (2000): "The REVERE Project: Experiments with the application of 
probabilistic NLP to Systems Engineering". In: Proceedings of 5th International 
Conference on Applications of Natural Language to Information Systems. 28-30th June, 
2000. Versailles, France.  
Rayson, Paul et al. (2004): "The UCREL semantic analysis system". Proceedings of the 
Workshop "Beyond Named Entity Recognition. Semantic Labelling for NLP Tasks" in 
association with the 4th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation 
(LREC). 26-28th May 2004. Lisbon, Portugal: 7–12. 
Scott, Mike (1997): "PC analysis of key words – and key key words". System 25/2: 233–245. 
Scott, Mike (1999): WordSmith Tools Help Manual, Version 3.0. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Scott, 
Mike 
(2007): 
WordSmith 
Tools 
Help 
Manual, 
Version 
4.0. 
http://www.lexically.net/downloads/version4/wordsmith.pdf, accessed April 14, 2015. 
Scott, Mike/Tribble, Chris (2006): Textual Patterns. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Secko, David .M. et al. (2011): "The Unfinished Science Story: Journalist-audience 
interactions from the Globe and Mail's online health and science section". Journalism 12/7: 
814–831. doi: 10.1177/1464884911412704. 
Suler, John (2004): "The Online Disinhibition Effect". Cyberpsychology and Behavior 7/3: 
321–326. 


Linguistik online 70, 1/15 
ISSN 1615-3014 
60 
Tausczik, Yla R./Pennebaker, James W. (2010): "The psychological meaning of words: 
LIWC and computerized text analysis methods". Journal of Language and Social 
Psychology 29/1: 24–54. 
Tognini-Bonelli, Elena (2001): Corpus linguistics at work. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Williams, Raymond (21983): Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society. London: 
Fontana. 
Wilson, Andrew (1993): "Towards an integration of content analysis and discourse analysis: 
the automatic linkage of key relations in text". UCREL Technical Paper 3. 
