TYPE Original Research
PUBLISHED 30 January 2023
DOI 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1099331
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Felix Septianto,
The University of Queensland, Australia
REVIEWED BY
Amy Errmann,
Auckland University of Technology,
New Zealand
Joya Kemper,
University of Canterbury, New Zealand
*CORRESPONDENCE
Mary Sanford
mary.sanford@stx.ox.ac.uk
SPECIALTY SECTION
This article was submitted to
Environmental Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
RECEIVED 15 November 2022
ACCEPTED 07 December 2022
PUBLISHED 30 January 2023
CITATION
Sanford M, Witkowska M, Giﬀord R and
Formanowicz M (2023) Emotional
framing in online environmental
activism: Pairing a Twitter study with
an oﬄine experiment.
Front. Psychol. 13:1099331.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1099331
COPYRIGHT
© 2023 Sanford, Witkowska, Giﬀord
and Formanowicz. This is an
open-access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other
forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright
owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is
cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which
does not comply with these terms.
Emotional framing in online
environmental activism: Pairing
a Twitter study with an oﬄine
experiment
Mary Sanford1*, Marta Witkowska2, Robert Giﬀord3 and
Magda Formanowicz2
1Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Environmental, Social and
Personality Lab, Department of Psychology, University of Social Sciences and Humanities, Warsaw,
Poland, 3Center for Research on Social Relations, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada
As the consequences of anthropogenic climate change become more
apparent, social media has become a central tool for environmental activists to
raise awareness and to mobilize society. In two studies, we examine how the
emotional framing of messages posted by environmental activists inﬂuences
engagement and behavioral intentions toward environmental action. In the
ﬁrst study, tweets (N = 510k) of 50 environmental activists posted between
November 2015 and December 2020 are examined to measure their emotional
content and its relation to tweet diﬀusion. Environment-related tweets are
found to be shared more the less they contain positive emotion and the more
they contain negative emotion. This result supports the negativity bias on social
media. In Study 2 (N = 200), we experimentally test whether negatively vs.
positively framed environmental content leads to increased reported intent to
engage with collective action, and whether mood mediates that link. We ﬁnd
both direct and indirect eﬀects on reported climate action intentions when
mood is used as a mediator. The negative mood resulting from seeing negative
tweets makes participants more likely to report higher action intention (indirect
eﬀect)—congruent with Study 1. However, seeing negative tweets also makes
participants less inclined to act (direct eﬀect), indicating a suppression eﬀect
and the presence of other factors at work on the pathway between information
and action intent formation. This work highlights the complex and multifaceted
nature of this relation and motivates more experimental work to identify other
relevant factors, as well as how they relate to one another.
KEYWORDS
climate change, activism, Twitter, emotion, framing, mood, suppression, psychology
1. Introduction
Social media platforms have become a critical venue for environmental activism
and communication. These platforms have opened up direct communication and
conversation channels between the general public and users seeking to raise
awareness and mobilize this public toward climate action (Pearce et al., 2015).
Frontiers in Psychology
01
frontiersin.org


Sanford et al.
10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1099331
Such users, referred to in this paper generally as activists,
include climate scientists and journalists, Green politicians, and
celebrities, who use their inﬂuence stature to communicate with
the public about environmental issues.
These environmental activists can be seen as “opinion
leaders,”
originally
conceptualized
by
Lazarsfeld
et
al.
(1968)
as
knowledgeable,
respected,
and
socially-active
mediators of public opinion. Previous work in environmental
communication demonstrates how opinion leaders shape
the social media discourses in which they operate and have
strong mobilizing power for pro-environmental action (Han
and Ahn, 2020; Boatwright, 2022; Dekoninck and Schmuck,
2022). However, most research examining environmental
communication on social media has taken a more general
approach, by tracking all content linked to popular terms or
hashtags, in order to capture the aggregate tenor and topical
distribution of a given discourse context. These analyzes treat
users and their posts as “sensors” emitting signals, which
when pooled together can provide an indication about public
understanding and opinion on diﬀerent topics (Boyd and
Crawford, 2012; Kirilenko and Stepchenkova, 2014; Kirilenko
et al., 2015).
This
kind
of
analysis
helps
to
summarize
various
characteristics of a discourse, but not to better understand
how prominent individuals or organizations may be shaping
it. While some studies identify the most prominent or
inﬂuential users and/or narratives in a discourse (Kirilenko and
Stepchenkova, 2014; Pearce et al., 2014; Williams et al., 2015;
Newman, 2017; Mavrodieva et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2022), few
have focused on opinion leaders and the strategies they use
to try to capture the public’s attention and persuade them to
act. Therefore, by examining activists speciﬁcally we deepen
the ﬁeld’s understanding of how key communicators may be
impacting the development of environmental discourses, as
well as what can be done to optimize this trajectory toward
maximum awareness and mobilization.
Meanwhile,
experimental
work
in
environmental
psychology demonstrates that the emotional frames that
communicators embed in messages about environmental issues
diﬀerentially impacts an audience’s reaction to and engagement
with this information. Yet, none of this work has focused
on
emotional
framing
in
environmental
communication
disseminated on social media platforms, nor on the messaging
of activists operating on them in order to harness their potential
for awareness building, persuasion, and mobilization. Instead,
researchers have focused predominantly on measuring the
overall sentiment of a given discourse context, or in oﬄine
studies, testing the eﬀects of emotional framing in longer form
text, e.g., newspaper articles. Given the rising prominence
of social media platforms as a source of news and general
information (Newman, 2021; Shearer and Mitchell, 2021;
Walker and Matsa, 2021), as well as the declining rates of users
consuming full-length articles (Haile, 2014; Thurman, 2014;
Dunaway et al., 2018; Martin, 2018), it is important to consider
engagement with emotional framing in social media contexts.
The present work seeks to contribute to this research
area with two studies. First, we investigate whether diﬀerent
emotional framing in the posts of environmental activists on
Twitter sparks correspondingly diﬀerential engagement from
their audiences in the form of retweets. In the second study,
emotional framing in tweets is experimentally manipulated to
see whether results obtained in Study 1 can be replicated in an
oﬄine setting, and to investigate a pathway potentially aﬀecting
reported behavioral intentions. Before we introduce the studies,
we detail the empirical and theoretical context of the work.
2. Literature review
Social media platforms have become an important arena
for environmental communication, activism, and mobilization
(Schäfer and Schlichting, 2014; Koteyko et al., 2015; Anderson,
2017; Lörcher and Taddicken, 2017; Mavrodieva et al., 2019;
Boulianne et al., 2020). An extensive body of literature has
accumulated in recent years on how environmental issues have
been presented and discussed on social media platforms. A
major ﬁnding of this work has been the extent to which
environmental discourses tend toward controversy (Wiest et al.,
2015; Olausson, 2018; Sanford et al., 2021), negativity (Dahal
et al., 2019; Loureiro and Alló, 2020; Tyagi et al., 2020; Sanford
et al., 2021), and polarization (Jang and Hart, 2015; Williams
et al., 2015; Garcia et al., 2019; Falkenberg et al., 2022). However,
very few studies have examined the role of speciﬁc thought
or opinion leaders in inﬂuencing these trends. New research
shows that individuals who follow environmental activists on
social media have stronger pro-environmental convictions and
behavioral intentions (Dekoninck and Schmuck, 2022). Yet, we
have little understanding of how the content of the messages
shared by activists relates to public engagement with activist
information campaigns, both on and oﬄine.
One component that previous experimental work with other
forms of environmental communication, e.g., news articles,
government leaﬂets, and videos, has identiﬁed as salient for
shaping pro-environmental beliefs and behavior is emotion.
Work in this literature typically compares the relative impact
of framing environmental communication stimuli with positive
emotions, such as hope and empowerment, to the impact of
framing the stimuli with negative emotions, such as fear, worry,
and anger, on a variety of pro-environmental behavioral and
attitudinal outcomes.
One branch of work in this area ﬁnds a clear positive
relationship between information containing positive emotions
and participants’ attention and pro-environmental behavioral
intentions
(Ojala,
2012;
Chadwick,
2014;
Feldman
and
Hart, 2016; Nabi et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2022). Further
research reports a complementary detrimental impact of
Frontiers in Psychology
02
frontiersin.org


Sanford et al.
10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1099331
negative emotion in environmental communication. Generally,
communication that contains negative messages with a focus
on risk, threat, and danger tend to trigger emotional responses
leading to feelings of helplessness, apathy, and contempt, all of
which decrease attention and behavioral intention (Loewenstein
et al., 2001; Lowe, 2006). In a study of the responses of
adolescents in Australia to negatively-framed climate change
education, the authors found the majority report feeling
disempowered and helpless regarding climate change (Jones
and Davison, 2021). Similarly, Feinberg and Willer (2011)
ﬁnd that when exposed to fear-mongering about “apocalyptic
consequences” of climate change in newspaper articles and
videos, participants report higher levels of apathy, denial, and
avoidance instead of action.
These
studies
suggest
that
negative
emotions
make
individuals feel less hopeful about the possibility to combat
climate change, and therefore less likely to partake in climate
action, while usage of positive emotions can be motivational
and engaging. However, another body of scholarship suggests
the opposite relation. Several experimental researchers have
found that negative emotions can help focus attention on
environmental issues and motivate deeper considerations
of possible solutions than information framed with positive
sentiment (Meijnders et al., 2001a,b; Hine et al., 2016; Bouman
et al., 2020; DiRusso and Myrick, 2021).
Moreover, based on the work of Baumeister et al. (2001)
and Rozin and Royzman (2001) , we know that individuals
have a tendency to pay more attention to negative (bad news)
than to positive content (good news) in media communication.
As a consequence, it is possible that this negativity bias has
precipitated an emphasis on negative content in environmental
communication on social media and in mainstream news media.
Indeed, several studies of coverage and communication of
environmental issues in both arenas conﬁrm a general trend
toward negative sentiment (Wiest et al., 2015; Dahal et al., 2019;
Loureiro and Alló, 2020; Tyagi et al., 2020; Sanford et al., 2021).
Not only is negative sentiment more prevalent, but it may
also be more engaging for some audiences. Del Vicario et al.
(2016) and Zhu et al. (2020) found that tweets related to
scientiﬁc and conspiracy content (unrelated to environmental
issues) displaying more negative emotion get retweeted more
than tweets displaying more positive emotion. Similarly, Fan
et al. (2014) found that in general, angry messages in particular
are more likely to spread on Weibo than joyful or sad ones. More
speciﬁc to environmental topics, De-Lara et al. (2022) examined
the Facebook posts of 10 public ﬁgures related to the Madrid
Climate Summit of 2019 (also known as COP 25), and found
that generally more emotional posts received more interactions
from the public than drier, more rational or information-
heavy posts. Additionally, in a study of the communication of
nine environmental non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
Barrios-O’Neill (2021) found tweets related to biodiversity with
more negative sentiment received more engagement. Curiously,
however, in a study of tweets related to the 2014 Earth Hour
campaign on Twitter, Fernandez et al. (2016) found that tweets
with positive sentiment generated higher levels of engagement.
Thus, within the experimental research on emotional
framing as well as the initial studies of emotional framing of
opinion leaders on social media, there is a lack of consensus
regarding how we can expect emotions to impact the audiences
exposed to it. This discord underscores one of the major
challenges underlying this area of research: Emotion is but one
factor inﬂuencing our attitudes and behavior. Our emotions
interact with other processes to contribute to our overall
aﬀective state, or mood, which is likely a more consistent
predictor of behavior and inﬂuence than individual emotional
responses (Russell and Barrett, 1996). It is therefore not safe to
assume that the response to any given emotional framing will be
the same for every person who encounters it (Chapman et al.,
2017), and we should rather try to understand the larger context
of cognitive processes contributing to ultimate attitudinal and
behavioral outcomes, summarized by our mood.
Mood and emotion are sometimes used interchangeably
but most psychologists agree that the two are “closely related
but distinct phenomena” (Beedie et al., 2005). Parkinson et al.
(1996) deﬁne mood as “an undirected evaluative mental state
which temporarily predisposes a person to interpret and act
toward a wide variety of events in ways according to its aﬀective
content” (p. 9–10). Watson and Clark (1994) conceptualize
mood as a “transient episode of feeling or aﬀect” inﬂuenced by
internal and external processes, including emotional responses
to our thoughts and environment. Gray and Watson (2003)
synthesize these deﬁnitions into an understanding of mood
as “states of mild to moderate intensity that wax and
wane gradually over time” (p. 27). They go on to make a
distinction between mood and emotion, stating that mood,
unlike emotions “cannot be linked to a speciﬁc precipitating
event or experience, but rather reﬂect the cumulative eﬀect of
multiple inputs (including both internal endogenous processes
and external events)” (ibid). Finally, Russell and Barrett
(1996) propose the framework in which emotions are pre-
conditions for establishing a given mood, and that mood is
therefore mediated by the full spectrum of our emotional
and cognitive responses to stimuli in our environment,
including the information we take in from it and its emotional
framing.
Therefore, it could be the case that the disagreement in
the literature on emotional framing results from inaccurately
assuming a linear path between emotional framing and
behavioral responses. For instance, the emotional response to a
given stimuli could trigger the formation of diﬀerent moods in
diﬀerent people depending on how that emotional response in
each individual interacts with their other internal processes and
predispositions. Thus, it appears that the traditional approach
of studying the relations between speciﬁc discrete emotions and
engagement without accounting for how they interact with other
Frontiers in Psychology
03
frontiersin.org


Sanford et al.
10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1099331
processes may not be suﬃcient for determining the true eﬀect of
emotional framing in environmental communication.
The research presented here seeks to clarify some of this
uncertainty. To do so, we ﬁrst measure positive and negative
emotion in the tweets posted by ﬁfty environmental activists
over 5 years, the largest sample collected to date. Using this data,
we investigate the following questions:
1. How frequently do environmental activists use positive and
negative emotion in their posts related to environmental
issues on Twitter? How does their use of these features
diﬀer within environment- and not environment-related
discourse?
2. How does the use of positive and negative emotion relate to
the retweet popularity of environment-related activist tweets?
The second part of this research endeavors to see if
the results of the Twitter analyzes can be replicated in an
experiment in which participants are shown real tweets diﬀering
in emotional framing. Additionally, we use test mood as a
mediator between the emotional framing and reported action
intent. Speciﬁcally we ask:
1. Do participants report more action intention upon viewing
positively framed or negatively framed tweets related to
climate change?
2. Does mood upon viewing the tweets mediate this relation?
As noted in the Introduction, there has been little
experimental work using social media posts as communication
stimuli. To the best of our knowledge, the only study to do so is
DiRusso and Myrick (2021)’s experiment with Instagram posts
about plastic pollution. Thus, the combination of the Twitter
analysis and the smaller scale experiment using Twitter posts
as stimuli contributes to an under-researched line of inquiry
by characterizing the roles of emotion and mood in inﬂuencing
the pathway between environmental activist communication on
social media and pro-environmental outcomes.
3. Study 1: Activists on Twitter
3.1. Materials and methods
3.1.1. Data
In the ﬁrst study, we examine expressions of emotionality
in the communication of environmental activists on the social
media platform Twitter. Twitter is a platform that allows users
to share written text, images, videos and links to external web
pages with their “followers.” These posts are called “tweets.”
Users can also share the tweets of other users via the “retweet”
mechanism which posts the original tweet onto the retweeting
user’s proﬁle, thereby exposing it to that user’s follower network.
This is the primary mechanism by which information spreads on
Twitter. While there are other forms of interaction on Twitter,
including liking and replying to a post, retweets are considered
the most reliable indicator of inﬂuence spread, or diﬀusion, on
the platform (Cha et al., 2010; Kwak et al., 2010; Boyd and
Crawford, 2012; Metaxas et al., 2015).
The sample of activists examined comes from Luo et al.
(2020) which used a list of Twitter users, each labeled as either
an environmental activist or denier for a language classiﬁcation
task. The list contains 100 users of each category and was
originally curated by Wikipedia users. In this paper, we are only
interested in the activists who still maintained active proﬁles at
time of collection (January 2021). This resulted in a set of 50
users. We also veriﬁed that none of the users were automated
“bot” accounts. Further details on this validation process are
provided in the Supplementary material.
All original tweets posted by the users on this list publicly
and still available from between November 2015 and December
2020 were collected using the Twitter Academic Research
API. After removing all duplicates, retweets, and replies, the
collection resulted in a dataset of over 510k total posts. This
ﬁgure is in line with the weekly average tweet rates across the
users in the sample. The activity and retweet details of all the
accounts are provided in Supplementary Table S1.
To identify the tweets most likely related to environmental
issues, an iterative process to identify a set of keywords
identifying content related to climate issues was undertaken.
This consisted of ﬁrst searching for tweets containing “climate
change,” “carbon,” and “environment” and then examining
random samples of tweets not including these terms but indeed
related to climate issues in order to identify which words or
phrases should also be included. Iterations continued until no
additional terms could be identiﬁed to reliably expand the
classiﬁcation.
This process resulted in a ﬁnal set of the following terms:
biodiversity, carbon, clean energy, clean power, climate, climate
change, CO2, coal, ecofriendly, emission, environment*, EPA (the
abbreviation of the United States’ Environmental Protection
Agency), global warming, green, oil, pollution, renewable, solar,
and sustainab*. The asterisks denote the stem of the word
for the terms that have multiple forms, e.g., environment vs.
environmental and sustainable vs. sustainability. The other
terms are already in the stemmed version according to the
stemmer available via the Gensim package for Python. See
Supplementary material for a summary of how we validated
the classiﬁcation approach. This process resulted in the
identiﬁcation of 218k environment-related tweets (43% of the
sample).
3.1.2. Analysis
The Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) dictionary
was used to extract measurements of positive and negative
emotion from each tweet in the full dataset. LIWC employs
a bag-of-words dictionary approach to quantify language
Frontiers in Psychology
04
frontiersin.org


Sanford et al.
10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1099331
TABLE 1 Examples of high scoring tweets from activists per psycholinguistic feature examined in the study.
Feature
Environment-related tweet
Not environment-related
tweet
Positive emotion
Lots of ways to lower carbon emissions associated w/ dietary choices.
Vegetarian is awesome, but pescatarian (what I am) better than meat,
chicken is better than beef. Local food is less energy-intensive, etc. Each of
us can ﬁnd ways to improve consistent w/ our preferences.
Thank you dear women of our lives! Thank
you for your wisdom, courage, and strength!
#100daysofresistance #WomensMarch
Negative emotion
Do you think it’s right that we go on destroying the natural world? A
bleached reef is a tragic sight. A desperately tragic sight, particularly if
you’ve seen it before, and you know what it could have been like.
#ActOnClimate #ClimateCrisis
Outrageous. Disgusting. Latin America
leaders condemn Trump’s Mexico wall
#ImmigrantRights #CELAC #DumpTrump
use in various sociopsychological categories (Tausczik and
Pennebaker, 2010). It functions as a software program which
takes text as input and returns a set of scores for 92 domains
per input. For each domain, LIWC reports the number of
words in the input text belonging to a unique dictionary of
words deﬁned for each domain. These dictionaries were curated
by psychologists, linguists, and sociologists, and then validated
externally in experimental studies (Tausczik and Pennebaker,
2010; Pennebaker et al., 2015). Some of the domains pertain
to grammatical features of text, e.g., the number of words,
verbs, nouns, etc. Other domains refer to various emotions
(e.g., sadness, anger, happiness, fear, etc.), cognition, relativity,
and social processes. The score for a domain is calculated by
comparing the number of words per text corresponding to the
domain dictionary to the total number of words in the text,
according to the following formula:
Score(domainx, textt) = 100 ∗|wordsx ∩textt|
|textt|
(1)
Where x is a given domain and t is in the input text.
As discussed in Pennebaker et al. (2015), LIWC has been
subjected to rigorous psycholinguistic evaluation across a variety
of contexts including news media, social media, professional
communication (e.g., email), and casual language (e.g., text
messaging). As such, its validity and reliability in detecting
grammatical and semantic categories in text is generally
accepted by scholars in numerous research ﬁelds, and has led
to its status as a standard method in linguistic analysis. A few
notable examples of research with LIWC include Sharma et al.
(2017)’s analysis of abortion discourse on Twitter; Tumasjan
et al. (2010)’s construction of psycholinguistic proﬁles of major
ﬁgures in the online German political discourse in the run-up
to a major election; Pietraszkiewicz et al. (2019)’s investigation
of gender-stereotyped use of agency and communion language
in job adverts; Dyer and Kolic (2020)’s construction of
semantic networks of death and aﬀect in Twitter discourse
related to COVID-19; and Tay (2021)’s comparison of the
sociopsychological proﬁles of newspaper coverage surrounding
the 2019 Hong Kong protest movement.
For illustrative purposes, Table 1 contains examples of
tweets from the environment- and not environment-related
subsets scoring highly for each feature. Before conducting the
linguistic analysis, the tweets are preprocessed to remove URLs,
usernames, punctuation, and stopwords.
Next, two regression models are used to model the
relationships between the variables of interests. Tweets are
nested within communicators as the model cases are not
independent, i.e., the stylistic variability of each user and the
fact that they have diﬀerent numbers of posts and followers.
This allowed us to achieve standard error estimations which
are robust to non-independence of the tweets’ features. Each
model includes ﬁxed eﬀects for year, month, and weekday
given the strong cyclical trends and high variation over time
of retweet engagement. The ﬁrst year of the dataset (2015) is
used as the reference level for year, while the modal values
of month (November) and weekday (Wednesday) are used for
those variables.
The ﬁrst model determined if the usage patterns of
the psycholinguistic features diﬀered in tweets that are
environment-related and those that are not. The second model
determined if any of the features are related to higher or lower
retweet engagement. Retweet engagement here serves as a proxy
of audience support for the content expressed in activist posts.
Previous research conﬁrms the utility and validity of singling
out retweets as a measure of inﬂuence and engagement (see Cha
et al., 2010; Kwak et al., 2010; Metaxas et al., 2015; Majmundar
et al., 2018. The number of “likes” a post receives could also be
used to approximate engagement but this mode of interaction is
generally considered weaker than retweets (Metaxas et al., 2015).
Further discussion of using retweets as the primary proxy of
engagement can be found in the Supplementary material.
In each model, the number of followers each user had at
time of collection and the word count of each tweet, excluding
usernames and URL links, are included as covariates. Word
count is not usually accounted for in Twitter studies, due to the
short character limit (280 characters) imposed by the platform.
However, it is possible there is some variation in tweet length
which could reﬂect diﬀerent communicative intentions. Indeed,
there is signiﬁcant variance in length among the tweets in our
sample, so it is included here to aﬀord for any impact this
variable could have on retweet probability. Follower count and
number of retweets are log transformed because they are highly
Frontiers in Psychology
05
frontiersin.org


Sanford et al.
10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1099331
right skewed. Moreover, the regressions used bootstrapped
standard errors which are robust to non-normality to further
account for the skew in these variables.
Finally, a path analysis is undertaken to determine whether
the environment relevance of a tweet is related to the use of the
emotional linguistic features, and in turn, if this aﬀects retweet
count. To do so, we again use bootstrapping in which a mean
indirect eﬀect is computed using a re-sampling method, typically
consisting of 5,000 iterations (Shrout and Bolger, 2002). The
method outputs p-values, conﬁdence intervals, and standard
error values for estimations of the direct and indirect eﬀects for
the variables included in the model, which are used to interpret
the mediation paths.
3.2. Results
Before building the models, we check for collinearity in
the datasets by examining the correlation between each pair
of variables. The results indicate that none of the variables are
correlated above the acceptable threshold of 0.85 (Kline, 2005)
so we proceed with the modeling. The descriptive statistics and
correlation table for each variable are presented in Tables 2, 3,
respectively. The scores for each linguistic feature correspond to
the average percentage of total words in a tweet corresponding
to each feature.
The distributions of retweets and followers per user are both
heavily skewed toward larger values and as such they must be
transformed to better approximate the normal distribution. The
log-transform works to accomplish this for both distributions so
the log of retweet and log of followers are used in all models.
Figure 1 visualizes a schematic of the variables and relations
modeled. The full output for each model is provided in the
Supplementary material.
First, the relation between emotion feature use and climate
content relevance is examined. The coeﬃcients of this model
are listed to the left of the emotion features in Figure 1. They
indicate that positive emotion is used much less in environment-
related tweets than in those unrelated to climate issues (B =
–1.1; SE = 0.23; p < 0.001; 95% CI: [–1.74, –0.64]), while use
of negative emotion is statistically consistent in both subsets (B
= 0.084; SE = 0.1; p = 0.42; 95% CI: [–0.12, 0.28]).
Second, all variables, including the log of followers, climate
content relevance, tweet length, and the emotion features are
used to predict the log of retweets. This model accounted for
34% of the variance of log retweets: R2 = 0.342, SE = 0.036,
p < 0.001, 95% CI = [0.27, 0.41]. As in previous studies, the
number of followers was a signiﬁcant predictor of the retweet
count (B = 0.78; SE = 0.08; p < 0.001, 95% CI: [0.62, 0.95]).
Tweet length in terms of word count is also positively related
to log retweets (B = 0.034; SE = 0.006; p < 0.001; 95% CI: [0.022,
0.046]). Importantly, we also found a signiﬁcant eﬀect of content
climate relevance (B = 0.28; SE = 0.22; p = 0.015; 95% CI: [0.06,
0.5]), suggesting environment-related tweets of activists were
more retweeted than not environment-related tweets.
In terms of the emotion features, tweets were more retweeted
the more they contained negative emotions (B = 0.021; SE
= 0.004; p < 0.001; 95% CI: [0.013, 0.029]), but the less
they had references to positive emotion (B = –0.009; SE
= 0.005; p = 0.073 ; 95% CI: [–0019, 0.001]) although the
statistical signiﬁcance of this eﬀect narrowly misses the α= 0.05
signiﬁcance level.
The path analyzes show that the indirect eﬀects through
positive and negative emotion between climate relevance and
retweet engagement both amounted to 0. Therefore, there is no
evidence to suggest that activists used more or less positive or
negative emotion when talking about environmental issues and
that this in turn led to higher retweet engagement.
4. Study 2: Experiment
The results of the ﬁrst study indicate that environment-
related content tends to be retweeted more when containing
more negative and less positive emotionality. In Study 2, we aim
to conﬁrm this eﬀect in a controlled experimental setting by
focusing on environment-related tweets only and manipulating
the emotionality of the presented tweets. In response to such an
emotional content participants could express their intention to
retweet and more generally their intention to engage in climate
action. We expect that in accordance with Study 1, less positive
content and more negative content will elicit higher retweet and
behavioral intention.
Additionally, we studied a psychological process standing
behind the decision to retweet or engage with climate action. As
described in the related work, mood is inﬂuenced by emotional
framing (Russell and Barrett, 1996) and thereafter inﬂuences our
actions and perspectives (Rucker and Petty, 2004; Barsade et al.,
2018; DiRusso and Myrick, 2021), and as such potentially acts as
a mediator between information input and behavioral response
in the context of environmental issues.
A between-subjects online experiment was conducted in
a Qualtrics survey and distributed to Proliﬁc participants in
January 2022. Participants were randomly distributed into the
positive or negative framing condition. This study was approved
by the institutional ethical review boards at the authors’
respective universities.
4.1. Materials and methods
4.1.1. Participants
An analysis of statistical power (f = 0.25, α= 0.05, 1-β= 0.80)
speciﬁed the target sample size as 128 participants. In order to
allow correction for low data quality based on attention checks,
we decided to collect 200 participants. The participants received
Frontiers in Psychology
06
frontiersin.org


Sanford et al.
10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1099331
TABLE 2 Descriptive statistics for the variables used in Study 1.
Overall
(N = 510,319)
Environment-related
(N = 218,100)
Not environment-related
(N = 292,219)
Variable
Base rate
M
SD
M
SD
M
SD
Positive emotion
5.48
3.65
6.32
2.88
4.07
4.22
7.13
Negative emotion
2.14
2.19
4.26
2.20
3.92
2.18
4.42
WC
-
20.3
11.2
22.5
10.9
19
11.2
Followers
-
551540 (12.3)
1711547 (1.6)
365447 (12.2)
1038317
( 0.94)
690432
(12.4)
2065427
(1.14)
Retweets
-
147.56 (2.79)
1749.98 (1.60)
92.3 (2.91)
841.9 (1.47)
188.9 (2.69)
2194.3
(1.68)
For two variables—Retweets and Followers—the descriptive statistics are presented in addition to the logarithmic transformation in parentheses. Constant of 1 has been added to all the
transformed variables for scaling reasons.
TABLE 3 Correlation coeﬃcients for the variables used in Study 1.
Variable
2
3
4
5
1. Positive emotion
–0.106***
–0.124***
0.022***
–0.064***
2. Negative emotion
–0.044***
0.012***
0.056***
3. Word count
0.048***
0.235***
4. FollowersT
0.519***
5. RetweetsT
Subscript T refers to logarithmic transformations. Constant of 1 has been added to all the transformed variables for scaling reasons.
***p ≤0.001.
FIGURE 1
Schematic representation of the models used to determine the direct and indirect eﬀect of followers, word count, content climate relevance,
positive and negative emotion on retweet popularity for activist tweets. Unstandardised coeﬃcients, standard errors, p-values, and 95%
conﬁdence interval for each coeﬃcient are provided on the lines connecting each variable. Variables for followers and retweet count are
marked with a subscript T to denote their log-transform.
£11.36 per hour for agreeing to take the survey, which took the
participants on average 6.2 min to complete.
We exclude 24 of the participants on the grounds of failing
manipulation checks. These checks are further described in
subsequent paragraphs. Seven others are also excluded because
they indicated they do not believe that action to mitigate climate
change is necessary. We do not repeat the analysis with these
users because the target group only includes people who would
Frontiers in Psychology
07
frontiersin.org


Sanford et al.
10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1099331
be most likely to attend to and engage with environmental
activist content, i.e., resembling those who engaged with the
tweets analyzed in Study 1.
After these exclusions, 169 participants remain. Of these,
75% identify as female, 23% as male, 2 participants prefer not
to say, and 1 elected to provide their own description. The age of
the participants ranges from 18 to 68, with an average of 35 years
and a standard deviation of 11.7 years. Most of the respondents
(38%) had attained at least a bachelor’s degree. Additionally,
the majority (55%) of respondents report a left-leaning political
orientation, with a smaller yet sizeable proportion (30.8%)
reporting neither left- nor right-wing. Regarding social media
use, 94.1% of participants reported having used at least one social
media platform in the last month. Of these, 75.1% reported using
social media multiple times per day.
4.1.2. Procedure
Upon recruitment to the experiment, participants were
shown a description of the study, including its purpose,
and further information on the study’s voluntary nature, the
conﬁdentiality of responses, and data protection protocols
along with Article 13 of the European Union’s General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR). Participants were then asked
to consent to join the experiment. Participants were then
allocated randomly to the positive or negative emotional framing
condition. Depending on this allocation, participants were
shown a set of tweets and asked to review them. Immediately
after viewing the tweets, participants answered items about
their mood (valence and the state of arousal), position on the
necessity of climate action, likeliness to retweet the tweets they
saw, and their likeliness to participate in a battery of actions to
support their stance on climate action. The survey then asked
participants to write a slogan to encourage participation with
climate action. The participants were made aware that providing
a slogan was completely optional.
Then, participants were asked to answer a series of
demographic questions (the variables named in the description
of the participants). Finally, the survey implemented checks
to determine the eﬀectiveness of the manipulation and how
well participants had been paying attention to the questions of
the experiment (Hoewe, 2017). First, a question informed the
participants that they had reached the end of the experiment and
that they should select “No” to proceed. This was done to catch
any participants who were not carefully reading the questions.
Second, participants were asked to recall the tweets they
had been shown and to rate their tone on a seven-point scale
Likert from “very negative” to “very positive.” This served as a
manipulation check and was done to ensure that participants
had perceived the tweets in accordance with their condition.
Third, they were shown a list of tweets and asked to select the
ones they had been shown. This was done to validate meaningful
engagement with the experiment. Participants who failed to
answer “No” on the ﬁrst question, correctly report the tone of
the tweets, or identify the tweets they had seen were excluded.
4.1.3. Stimuli
Each experimental condition included a set of three tweets.
The text of the tweets was either directly copied or lightly
paraphrased from tweets in the dataset collected in Study 1
which scored highly on either positive or negative emotion. They
tweets were selected, and lightly edited when necessary, to be as
similar between the conditions as possible in terms of length and
strength of sentiment valence. The three tweets were shown to
the users all together.
The images of the tweets were generated artiﬁcially using the
website TweetGen. We did this so that we could standardize
the number of retweets, likes, and comments received by the
tweets pairwise between conditions, thereby controlling for any
bias resulting from impressions of retweet count popularity
(Taylor et al., 2022). We also obscure the place where the user’s
name and Twitter handle would be to prevent any bias resulting
from aﬃnities or disaﬃnities for particular activists. Limitations
deriving from this decision are discussed later in the paper.
The text of the three tweets in the positive condition include:
• Talking about #ClimateChange and #ClimateAction as
“opportunities” can inspire hope.
• #ClimateAction is a blessing not a burden! More jobs, better
jobs; Inclusive, robust economies; Lower healthcare costs;
Better security!
• Transitioning
to
renewable
energy
to
ﬂight
#ClimateChange strengthens national security and is
a source of innovation, jobs, and wealth.
Meanwhile, the three tweets in the negative condition
include:
• The inaction of our governments on the climate emergency
is a threat to everyone. It is infuriating!
• Depression,
anxiety,
post-traumatic
stress
disorder,
domestic & substance abuse all tend to go up in the
aftermath of a #ClimateDisaster.
• #ClimateChange posts a critical national security threat and
is amplifying many hazards and dangers for all of us.
4.1.4. Measures
Mood response was measured using the nine-point Self-
Assessment-Manikin scales for valence and arousal as presented
in Lang (1980). The two scales comprise an established picture-
based methodology for the extraction of people’s emotional
states. Each scale consists of 9 illustrations, each depicting a
caricature manifesting emotional states. They range from sad
(value 1 on the scale) to happy (value 9 on the scale) in the scale
Frontiers in Psychology
08
frontiersin.org


Sanford et al.
10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1099331
FIGURE 2
Visualization of the mediation analysis showing the direct relationship between content and collective action, along with an indirect relationship
between the two mediated by mood. The total eﬀect between content and collective action is given in parentheses below the direct eﬀect on
the arrow connecting the two variables in the diagram. The coeﬃcient of the direct relationship is negative while the eﬀects of the indirect path
(content to mood and mood to collective action) combine to yield a positive coeﬃcient.
of valence and from calm (value 1 on the scale) to excited (value
9 on the scale) in the scale of arousal. Immediately after viewing
the tweets, participants were asked to indicate which ﬁgure best
represents their current emotional state.
To determine the participants’ stance on the necessity of
climate action, they were ﬁrst asked to think about human-
driven climate change. They were also told that it is the
center of a heated debate. The question text then informed the
participants that the authors of the tweets they had just seen
express the need for climate action to protect the environment,
while others do not think climate action is necessary. They were
then asked to indicate their position within this debate using a
seven-point Likert scale with options ranging from “deﬁnitely
unnecessary” to “deﬁnitely necessary.”
The primary dependent variable of our analysis is reported
intention to partake in collective action after viewing the tweets.
The belief-aligned collective action scale presented in Cervone
et al. (2021) is used. Examples of actions on the scale include:
“I would carry out research to learn more about possible actions
I can take to promote my position” and “I would attend a rally,
a march, or a protest to assert my position.” Additionally, to
make the Study 2 coherent with Study 1, we added to the scale
a question on likelihood of retweeting the presented tweets.
Participants are asked to rate their likelihood of engaging with
each of the actions using a seven-point Likert scale with options
ranging from “very unlikely” to “very likely.” The Cronbach’s
alpha score for the items is 0.905, indicating a very good level
of internal consistency.
4.1.5. Analysis
The results were analyzed in three stages. First, a one-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) is used to determine whether
the experimental conditions diﬀered with respect to the mood
they elicit in participants. Then, another ANOVA is carried
out to determine whether the experimental conditions diﬀered
with respect to elicited action intention. Finally, path analysis
is used to measure the total, direct, and indirect eﬀects of the
experimental conditions and mood on reported collective action
intention.
4.1.6. Results
In order to see whether the two experimental conditions
diﬀered with respect to elicited mood we conducted a one-
way analysis of variance (ANOVA). Indeed participants in the
positive emotion condition had a more positive mood (M =
5.84; SD = 1.34) than participants in the negative emotion
condition [M = 3.94; SD = 1.26; F(1, 167) = 89.07, p < 0.001;
η2= 0.35]. Arousal on the contrary, was not aﬀected by the
experimental manipulation [F(1, 167) = 0.43, p = 0.51; η2=
0.003], so participants in the positive (M = 4.66; SD = 1.48) and
negative condition (M = 4.49; SD = 1.87) were similarly aroused
by the content of messages.
Second, we examined the direct relationship between the
two experimental conditions and reported collective action
intention. The latter was not aﬀected by the experimental
manipulation [F(1, 167) = 2.04, p = 0.16; η2= 0.01], so
participants in the positive (M = 3.76; SD = 1.18) and negative
condition (M = 3.47; SD = 1.50) were similarly keen on taking a
collective action after seeing the messages.
To see whether the manipulation aﬀected the valence of
mood, which in turn had an eﬀect on collective action intentions,
we conducted the mediation analysis presented in Figure 2. This
analysis tested the direct and indirect relationships between
content framing, mood, and collective action intent. There are
two main ﬁndings.
First, the path analysis revealed a signiﬁcant direct negative
relation between negative content framing and collective action
intent, suggesting that seeing the negatively framed tweets led to
lower reported intent to engage. This result appears to contradict
the outcome of Study 1, which suggested that content with
less positive and more negative sentiment may increase action
tendency measured through retweet engagement. However,
Frontiers in Psychology
09
frontiersin.org


Sanford et al.
10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1099331
the path analysis also revealed a signiﬁcant indirect eﬀect of
framing through mood on action intention: Negative framing
decreased reported mood which increased reported collective
action intent. This eﬀect amounted to 0.37 with a bootstrapped
95% conﬁdence interval of 0.06 to 0.71 and is congruent with
Study 1.
Therefore, including mood as a mediator suggests a ﬁnal
signiﬁcant direct positive eﬀect of negative content framing on
collective action. Given the insigniﬁcant total eﬀect between
negative content framing and collective action (given in
parentheses below the statistics of the direct eﬀect on the arrow
connecting the two variables in Figure 2), such an increase
in magnitude of the relationship between a predictor and
an outcome indicates statistical suppression (also: inconsistent
mediation, MacKinnon et al., 2000). Speciﬁcally, within a
mediation model, a suppression eﬀect is present when the direct
and mediated eﬀects of an independent variable on a dependent
variable have opposite signs.
In line with that, the results imply the presence of two
opposing processes in the model. On the one hand, seeing
negative tweets increases willingness to engage because it
depresses mood (the indirect pathway), potentially increasing
a sense of urgency to act. On the other hand, it decreases
engagement in collective action (the direct pathway) potentially
via another mechanism yet to be identiﬁed. These results and
possible explanations for them are further discussed in the
next section.
5. Discussion
The results of both the Twitter study and the experiment
suggest that framing with negative emotion may be more
eﬀective than positive emotion in generating engagement within
individuals who are likely to be concerned about environmental
issues. The primary result of the Twitter analysis is that
environment-related content posted by activists is retweeted
more when it contains more negative emotion and less positive
emotion. This result converges with previous studies for
other discourses on social media which found preferential
engagement for content with higher negative sentiment (Soroka
and McAdams, 2015; Zhu et al., 2020).
One potential explanation of this result may be that
more negative messages from activists are more eﬀective at
eliciting support via retweet as a signal of participation with
environmental clicktivism (Rotman et al., 2011; George and
Leidner, 2019; Morozov, 2019). However, the ﬁndings of the
Twitter study are unable to reveal whether this bias toward
negativity extends beyond retweet engagement and into oﬄine
behavior. Therefore, the results raise questions as to whether
exposure to environment-related content on social media with
more negative content motivates audience members to support
the environmental movement oﬄine through collective action.
This question was investigated in Study 2.
The results of the experiment reveal a duality in the eﬀect of
emotional framing on action intention. When directly modeling
the relationship, participants exposed to messages with negative
emotion were less likely to report higher likelihood of engaging
with climate action. However, at the same time when mood was
used to mediate the relationship, we ﬁnd that messages with
negative emotion elicited a more negative mood in participants
and they therefore reported to be more likely to engage with
the oﬄine action. The contradiction between the direct and
indirect eﬀects is evidence of a suppression eﬀect of mood on the
relationship between emotional framing and action intention.
The indirect eﬀect is similar to the results obtained in Study
1, where negative content elicited more engagement through
retweeting. However, the direct eﬀect goes in the opposite
direction, showing that negative emotional framing can also
inhibit reported readiness to act.
These results make clear that studies of emotional framing
in environmental communication should not assume a direct
linear relationship between emotional framing and action
outcomes. Researchers need to incorporate additional processes
which may mediate the potential of a given emotional frame
to stimulate action intent. If we had not included mood in
our model, the coeﬃcient on the direct relationship between
emotional frame and action intent would have led us to conclude
that the higher engagement with messages containing more
negative emotion observed in the Twitter study could not be
replicated in a smaller scale experiment oﬄine. In which case,
it would have suggested that engagement trends on Twitter
may not be able to tell us anything meaningful about oﬄine
engagement in this context. Instead, including mood in the
model suggests that people may be more likely to engage with
more negative content about climate change because it triggers a
negative emotional state.
As summarized in the literature review, most work on
emotion in environmental communication has investigated
how framing messages with emotion makes participants feel
about the legitimacy and risks of climate change or aﬀects
motivation for taking action. These studies have generally
found mixed results regarding positive vs. negative emotional
framing leading to higher levels of reported engagement with
climate action. The lack of consensus in these results likely
stems from the implied assumption that emotion alone governs
our responses to environmental communication, leading to
the exclusion of other mechanisms inﬂuencing the pathway
between content framing and outcome variables. Our results
show that it is imperative to explore and understand the
mechanisms which lead to diﬀerent, and perhaps competing,
behavioral responses to the same message. Mood is undoubtedly
but one of several mechanisms governing this pathway. It is
also likely that emotional framing is not the only type of
communication framing with the power to inﬂuence mood.
While previous studies have examined diﬀerent dimensions
of framing in environmental communication (e.g., speciﬁc
Frontiers in Psychology
10
frontiersin.org


Sanford et al.
10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1099331
vs. abstract advice, local vs. global consequences, collective
vs. individual responsibility) and their eﬀects on reported
action intention, none have accounted for the psychometric
mechanisms or processes which mediate this pathway.
We have been discussing the experiment results mostly in
terms of the impact of negative framing, but we could also
describe them in terms of the positive condition: Seeing positive
tweets facilitated engagement in collective action, however
at the same time it decreased willingness to engage because
it elevated mood. One potential explanation of the results
from this perspective comes from relative deprivation theory
(RDT). The traditional focus of RDT is when, how, and why
people subjectively experience unjust advantages, and how this
perception can lead to collective action (Stouﬀer et al., 1949;
Merton and Lazersfeld, 1950; Runciman, 1966; Pettigrew, 1967;
Crosby, 1976; Crosby and Gonzalez-Intal, 1984; Folger, 1987;
Walker and Smith, 2002). RDT began from the observation
that objective collective deprivation could not predict collective
action outcomes. Instead, the subjective experience of collective
deprivation could. As such, RDT has been used to determine
what social comparisons foster collective action and which
do not (Smith and Ortiz, 2002), as well as whether aﬀective
components of group-based deprivation impact motivation for
collective action (Guimond and Dubé-Simard, 1983; Tyler and
Smith, 1998).
These investigations of RDT have led to the understanding
that group-based anger toward a collectively-felt grievance or
injustice is a powerful motivator for collective action. Therefore,
because the positively-framed messages induce a positive mood
about climate change instead of a sense of anger toward a
collective grievance, the messages are not uniformly successful
at motivating collective action. Rather, the positively-framed
messages might elicit a kind of passivity, or a divorcing of
individual responsibility from the problem because the messages
give the idea that things are not so bad or that someone else
is already taking care of it (van Zomeren et al., 2019). Adding
further support to this explanation, the work of Bloodhart et al.
(2019) and Iniguez-Gallardo et al. (2021) demonstrate that many
people who actively attend to environmental issues have strong
negative emotions associated with them. Thus, it could be the
case that when they then encounter communication which lifts
their mood, it may reduce their sense of urgency to act.
Further research should probe this relationship between
positivity
and
collective
action,
while
also
taking
into
consideration the diﬀerent narratives and topics that could
be discussed. For example, talking about climate action
solutions in a positive manner without emphasizing how
or
why
individuals
and
communities
can
get
involved
may be one reason positive messages are less galvanizing.
The
conﬂuence
of
emotion
and
agency
is
extremely
important and needs to be further examined in order to
identify ways of formulating more eﬀective and engaging
environmental communication.
Finally, it is clear that our model does not capture everything
governing the pathway between information framing and
collective action intent. For example, it is likely that the direct
pathway we observe is mediated by some other mechanism(s),
which the mood pathway cancels out (or vice-versa) in terms
of outcomes for collective action intent. Future research should
endeavor to identify and test these other mechanisms.
6. Limitations
The work contains limitations. First, we only analyze the
text of each tweet, excluding any videos, images, or links that
might be associated with them. This means we lose some
information conveyed by these attachments. Moreover, while
LIWC continues to be one of the most popular choices for
broad computational linguistic analysis, the tool is not without
shortcomings. LIWC does not enable us to detect higher-level
semantic features such as irony and sarcasm. Furthermore, it
is not able to account for context-related features of language
which are not commonly detectable with a lexicon-based
approach.
Additionally, the external validity of research using Twitter
data is inherently limited because it is not representative of
any given demographic population, nor of the full social media
discourse on environmental issues. Moreover, we only focus on
ﬁfty activist accounts. These are not representative of the full
scope of environmental activists on social media. Nonetheless,
these users constitute a sample of prominent opinion leaders in
online environmental activism. It is therefore still useful to study
them to get an initial sense of the general trends in emotional
framing that environmental activists use in their communication
on Twitter. They present an initial benchmark for the link
between emotional framing and retweet engagement for future
work to expand upon with investigations of other users, perhaps
on diﬀerent platforms, and with other types of interactions.
While the Twitter study seeks to identify the correlation
between emotion in tweets and retweet engagement, it does not
take into account non-content related variables of the tweets,
besides each user’s follower count, and how these might also
aﬀect engagement. Acknowledging that the study is not able
to test for all possible variables that may account for user
engagement with online content, it does provide valuable insight
into the signiﬁcance of a range of psycholinguistic features on
social media.
Moreover, both the Twitter study and the experiment were
conducted using English speakers and English text. Therefore,
we were not able to provide an analysis of communication
published in other languages. Future research could address
this linguistic bias by repeating this analysis for another set
of activists who produce content in diverse languages and
geographic regions.
Frontiers in Psychology
11
frontiersin.org


Sanford et al.
10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1099331
Turning to the experiment, the insights we are able to
oﬀer are limited to reported behavior. People are known
to report themselves as more environmentally friendly than
they actually are in real life (Kormos and Giﬀord, 2014).
Thus, we must acknowledge that the participants in our
experiment may have over-reported their intention to engage
in collective action. However, this is a limitation of all research
in environmental communication using one-oﬀexperiments,
which to date, makes up a bulk of the ﬁeld. A longitudinal study
of participants controlling for the psycholinguistic features of
the environmental communication to which they are exposed
over time would be ideal but also highly resource intensive. As
such, one-oﬀexperiments give us the most eﬃcient glimpse into
the human psyche, providing useful data upon which subsequent
studies can build.
Another concern is the extent to which the observed
eﬀects of the experimental conditions result purely from the
positive or negative framing of the tweets. Although the tweets
were selected based on the dominance of positive or negative
emotional valence over other psycholinguistic features, it is
still possible that connotations of the content diﬀered among
participants. It is also possible that references to certain topics
in the tweets resonated unevenly with participants, eliciting
diﬀerent reactions that had little to do with the framing
manipulation. Additional piloting of the tweets could have
helped to identify the existence of these potential confounding
variables. Nonetheless, this is a trade-oﬀof using real tweets and
not designing content to be as “sterile’ as possible with respect
to potential confounding variables. At the risk of increasing
the presence of potentially confounding variables, we test
tweets manifesting the true framing tendencies of environmental
activists thereby increasing the external validity of the measures.
Moreover, while the tweets are presented to the users in
the same style that they would encounter the messages on the
platform itself, the fact remains that they are viewing these tweets
within an experiment, a context which is obviously diﬀerent to
how they would encounter the tweets in real life. This is also
a limitation of most environmental communication studies in
which measuring the eﬀect of a speciﬁc frame manipulation
is desired. The tweets are also presented to the participants
with the username and proﬁle photo obscured. This was done
to reduce the chance of inducing reactions to the tweets that
might stem less from the emotional framing of the tweet, and
more from the stature of the particular activist or opinions the
participants may have about the activist. We could not control
for participants’ awareness of speciﬁc activists, thus identity
eﬀects were beyond the scope of this experiment. However,
they have been demonstrated in previous work on Twitter to
have signiﬁcant eﬀects on engagement (Taylor et al., 2022).
Therefore, it would be interesting to attempt to isolate the eﬀects
of activist identity on engagement. Moreover, there could also be
interactions between identity and emotional framing that future
work should consider examining.
Regarding the sample, we only include participants in the
analysis who reported to already be convinced of the danger
of environmental issues and the need to act. Therefore, the
results do not generalize to people who are more undecided
or simply less likely to be paying attention to environmental
activism, nor those who might outright deny environmental
issues as real phenomena. Moreover, the sample is heavily biased
toward participants identifying as female. This is potentially
problematic as there is evidence suggesting that participants
identifying as female have stronger pro-environmental attitudes
and behaviors than participants identifying as male, and
that this tendency stems from the former demonstrating
higher levels of social aﬃliation and responsibility (Zelezny
et al., 2000). Moreover, additional studies have found gender
diﬀerences in various contexts of emotional regulation and
mood management (see Nolen-Hoeksema, 2012 for a review).
Thus, it is possible that the results of the experiment are
skewed by the gender bias in the participant sample. Additional
experimentation should be conducted to ascertain the extent
to which the framing-mood-behavior pathway found here
generalizes across genders, and/or to determine what gender
diﬀerences exist.
7. Conclusion
In conclusion, this work contributes to the literature of
online environmental communication by being one of the ﬁrst
to investigate the relationship between the use of emotional
framing by environmental activists on social media and audience
engagement. To date, the literature has found mixed results for
how we can expect emotional framing to impact how we feel
about environmental issues and our likelihood to engage with
collective action. The results of the Twitter study support the
media negativity bias: people tend to engage more with content
when it contains more negative emotion. The results of the
experiment provide additional insight into one mechanism—
mood—which may underlie the Twitter results: Negative
emotion elicits a negative mood which then increases reported
action intent. Meanwhile, we also ﬁnd evidence for another
mechanism having the opposite eﬀect (lowering action intent),
which appears to interfere with the mood mechanism. These
results contradict what previous work has found suggesting
a positive eﬀect of positive emotions on engagement with
environmental activism.
More work needs to be done to understand why this is the
case and what this other mechanism might be. One way to begin
could be by examining the impact of additional psycholinguistic
features, speciﬁc narratives, and content format on action intent.
It could be possible that certain narratives when paired with
certain emotions in a speciﬁc format elicit diﬀerent mood and
action intention responses than other combinations. While there
may not be a single “silver bullet” formulation for environmental
Frontiers in Psychology
12
frontiersin.org


Sanford et al.
10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1099331
communication, it is clear that social media can and will play
a signiﬁcant role in the attempts of activists to mobilize more
people to take climate action. Further research into what works
for which demographics will assist in better understanding
how activists can calibrate their activism media to optimize
engagement both on- and oﬄine.
Data availability statement
The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will
be made available by the authors, without undue reservation.
Ethics statement
The studies involving human participants were reviewed
and approved by SWPS University of Social Sciences and
Humanities, Faculty of Psychology in Warsaw; University
of Oxford, Social Sciences and Humanities Interdivisional
Research Ethics Committee. The patients/participants provided
their written informed consent to participate in this study.
Author contributions
MS was responsible for the initial conceptualization of the
project, Twitter data collection and analysis, and drafting of the
experimental materials. MW and MF deployed the experiment
and analyzed the experimental data. MS, MW, and MF drafted
the manuscript. RG contributed to the literature, framing, and
revision of the manuscript. All authors approved the submitted
version.
Funding
This research was funded by the UKRI ESRC Grand
Union Doctoral Training Program (2262660) awarded to MS,
the OPUS 19 grant of the Polish National Science Center
(2020/37/B/HS6/02587) awarded to MF, and the OPUS 22 grant
of the Polish National Science Center (2021/43/B/HS6/02819)
awarded to MW.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Anne Maass, Caterina Suitner, and
Aleksandra Cichocka for their helpful discussions and input
throughout the development of the project. We also thank
the reviewers whose revisions contributed signiﬁcantly to the
reﬁnement of the paper.
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in
the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships
that
could
be
construed
as
a
potential
conﬂict
of interest.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed
or endorsed by the publisher.
Supplementary material
The Supplementary Material for this article can be
found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/
fpsyg.2022.1099331/full#supplementary-material
References
Anderson, A. A. (2017). Eﬀects of Social Media Use on Climate Change Opinion,
Knowledge, and Behavior. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Barrios-O’Neill, D. (2021). Focus and social contagion of environmental
organization
advocacy
on
Twitter.
Conservat.
Biol.
35,
307–315.
doi: 10.1111/cobi.13564
Barsade, S. G., Coutifaris, C. G. V., and Pillemer, J. (2018). Emotional
contagion
in
organizational
life.
Res.
Organ.
Behav.
38,
137–151.
doi: 10.1016/j.riob.2018.11.005
Baumeister, R. F., Bratslavsky, E., Finkenauer, C., and Vohs, K. D. (2001). Bad is
stronger than good. Rev. Gen. Psychol. 5, 323–370. doi: 10.1037/1089-2680.5.4.323
Beedie, C., Terry, P., and Lane, A. (2005). Distinctions between emotion and
mood. Cogn. Emot. 19, 847–878. doi: 10.1080/02699930541000057
Bloodhart, B., Swim, J. K., and Dicicco, E. (2019). “Be worried, be very worried:”
preferences for and impacts of negative emotional climate change communication.
Front. Commun. 3, 63. doi: 10.3389/fcomm.2018.00063
Boatwright, B. C. (2022). Exploring online opinion leadership in the network
paradigm: an analysis of inﬂuential users on Twitter shaping conversations
around anthem protests by prominent athletes. Public Relat. Rev. 48, 102229.
doi: 10.1016/j.pubrev.2022.102229
Boulianne, S., Lalancette, M., and Ilkiw, D. (2020). “School strike 4 climate”:
social media and the international youth protest on climate change. Media
Commun. 8, 208–218. doi: 10.17645/mac.v8i2.2768
Bouman, T., Verschoor, M., Albers, C. J., Böhm, G., Fisher, S. D., Poortinga, W.,
et al. (2020). When worry about climate change leads to climate action: how values,
worry and personal responsibility relate to various climate actions. Glob. Environ.
Change 62, 102061. doi: 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2020.102061
Boyd, D., and Crawford, K. (2012). Critical questions for big data. Inf. Commun.
Soc. 15, 662–679. doi: 10.1080/1369118X.2012.678878
Cervone, C., Suitner, C., Carraro, L., and Maass, A. (2021). An impartial measure
of collective action: development and validation of the belief-aligned collective
action scale. PsyArXiv. doi: 10.31234/osf.io/vunh4
Frontiers in Psychology
13
frontiersin.org


Sanford et al.
10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1099331
Cha, M., Haddadi, H., Benevenuto, F., and Gummadi, K. P. (2010).
“Measuring user inﬂuence in Twitter: the million follower fallacy,” in ICWSM ’10:
Proceedings of international AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social (Washington,
DC: AAAI).
Chadwick, A. E. (2014). Toward a theory of persuasive hope: eﬀects of cognitive
appraisals, hope appeals, and hope in the context of climate change. Health
Commun. 30, 598–611. doi: 10.1080/10410236.2014.916777
Chapman, D. A., Lickel, B., and Markowitz, E. M. (2017). Reassessing
emotion in climate change communication. Nat. Clim. Chang 7, 850–852.
doi: 10.1038/s41558-017-0021-9
Chen, K., Molder, A. L., Duan, Z., Boulianne, S., Eckart, C., Mallari, P., et al.
(2022). How climate movement actors and news media frame climate change and
strike: evidence from analyzing Twitter and news media discourse from 2018 to
2021:. Int. J. Press/Politics. doi: 10.1177/19401612221106405
Crosby, F. (1976). A model of egoistical relative deprivation. Psychol. Rev. 83,
85–113. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.83.2.85
Crosby, F., and Gonzalez-Intal, A. M. (1984). “Relative deprivation and equity
theories,” in The Sense of Injustice: Social Psychological Perspectives, Critical Issues
in Social Justice, ed R. Folger (Boston, MA: Springer U.S.), 141–166.
Dahal, B., Kumar, S. A. P., and Li, Z. (2019). Topic modeling and
sentiment analysis of global climate change tweets. Soc. Netw. Anal. Min. 9, 24.
doi: 10.1007/s13278-019-0568-8
Dekoninck, H., and Schmuck, D. (2022). The mobilizing power of inﬂuencers
for pro-environmental behavior intentions and political participation. Environ.
Commun. 16, 458–472. doi: 10.1080/17524032.2022.2027801
Del Vicario, M., Vivaldo, G., Bessi, A., Zollo, F., Scala, A., Caldarelli, G., et al.
(2016). Echo chambers: emotional contagion and group polarization on facebook.
Sci. Rep. 6, 37825. doi: 10.1038/srep37825
De-Lara, A., Erviti, M.-C., and León, B. (2022). Communication strategies in
the climate change debate on Facebook. Discourse on the madrid climate summit
(COP 25). Profesional de la Información 31, 2. doi: 10.3145/epi.2022.mar.02
DiRusso, C., and Myrick, J. G. (2021). Sustainability in CSR messages
on social media: how emotional framing and eﬃcacy aﬀect emotional
response,
memory
and
persuasion.
Environ.
Commun.
15,
1045–1060.
doi: 10.1080/17524032.2021.1933120
Dunaway, J., Searles, K., Sui, M., and Paul, N. (2018). News attention in a mobile
era. J. Comput. Mediated Commun. 23, 107–124. doi: 10.1093/jcmc/zmy004
Dyer, J., and Kolic, B. (2020). Public risk perception and emotion on
Twitter during the Covid-19 pandemic. Applied Network Science 5, 1–32.
doi: 10.1007/s41109-020-00334-7
Falkenberg, M., Galeazzi, A., Torricelli, M., Di Marco, N., Larosa, F., Sas, M.,
et al. (2022). Growing polarization around climate change on social media. Nat.
Climate Change 12, 1114–1121. doi: 10.1038/s41558-022-01527-x
Fan,
R.,
Zhao,
J.,
Chen,
Y.,
and
Xu,
K.
(2014).
Anger
is
more
inﬂuential than joy: sentiment correlation in weibo. PLoS ONE 9, e0110184.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110184
Feinberg, M., and Willer, R. (2011). Apocalypse soon?: dire messages reduce
belief in global warming by contradicting just-world beliefs. Psychol. Sci. 22, 34–38.
doi: 10.1177/0956797610391911
Feldman, L., and Hart, P. S. (2016). Using political eﬃcacy messages to increase
climate activism: the mediating role of emotions. Sci. Commun. 38, 99–127.
doi: 10.1177/1075547015617941
Fernandez, M., Piccolo, L. S. G., Maynard, D., Wippoo, M., Meili, C., and Alani,
H. (2016). Talking Climate Change via Social Media: Communication, Engagement
and Behaviour. New York, NY: ACM.
Folger, R. (1987). “Reformulating the preconditions of resentment: a referent
cognitions model,” in Social Comparison, Social Justice, and Relative Deprivation:
Theoretical, Empirical, and Policy Perspectives (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc.), 183–215.
Garcia, D., Galaz, V., and Daume, S. (2019). EATLancet vs yes2meat:
the digital backlash to the planetary health diet. Lancet 394, 2153–2154.
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(19)32526-7
George,
J.
J.,
and
Leidner,
D.
E.
(2019).
From
clicktivism
to
hacktivism:
understanding
digital
activism.
Inf.
Organ.
29,
100249.
doi: 10.1016/j.infoandorg.2019.04.001
Gray, E., and Watson, D. (2003). “Emotions, mood, and temperament:
similarities, diﬀerences, and a synthesis,” in Emotions at Work: Theory, Research
and Applications for Management, eds R. L. Payne and C. Cooper (Chichester: John
Wiley & Sons).
Guimond, S., and Dubé-Simard, L. (1983). Relative deprivation theory
and the Quebec nationalist movement: the cognition-emotion distinction
and the personal-group deprivation issue. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 44, 526–535.
doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.44.3.526
Haile, T. (2014). What You Get Wrong about the Internet. Available online at:
https://time.com/12933/what-you-think-you-know-about-the-web-is-wrong/
Han, H., and Ahn, S. W. (2020). Youth mobilization to stop global climate
change: narratives and impact. Sustainability 12, 4127. doi: 10.3390/su12104127
Hine, D. W., Phillips, W. J., Cooksey, R., Reser, J. P., Nunn, P., Marks, A.
D. G., et al. (2016). Preaching to diﬀerent choirs: How to motivate dismissive,
uncommitted, and alarmed audiences to adapt to climate change? Glob. Environ.
Change 36, 1–11. doi: 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.11.002
Hoewe, J. (2017). “Manipulation check,” in The International Encyclopedia of
Communication Research Methods (Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.), 1–5.
Iniguez-Gallardo, V., Lenti Boero, D., and Tzanopoulos, J. (2021). Climate
change and emotions: analysis of people’s emotional states in southern ecuador.
Front. Psychol. 12, 644240. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.644240
Jang, S. M., and Hart, P. S. (2015). Polarized frames on “climate change” and
“global warming” across countries and states: evidence from Twitter big data. Glob.
Environ. Change 32, 11–17. doi: 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.02.010
Jones, C. A., and Davison, A. (2021). Disempowering emotions: The role of
educational experiences in social responses to climate change. Geoforum 118,
190–200. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2020.11.006
Kirilenko, A. P., Molodtsova, T., and Stepchenkova, S. O. (2015). People as
sensors: mass media and local temperature inﬂuence climate change discussion on
Twitter. Glob. Environ. Change 30, 92–100. doi: 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.11.003
Kirilenko, A. P., and Stepchenkova, S. O. (2014). Public microblogging on
climate change: one year of Twitter worldwide. Glob. Environ. Change 26, 171–182.
doi: 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.02.008
Kline, R. B. (2005). Principles and Practice of Structural Equation Modeling, 2nd
Edn. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Kormos, C., and Giﬀord, R. (2014). The validity of self-report measures
of proenvironmental behavior: a meta-analytic review. J. Environ. Psychol. 40,
359–371. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvp.2014.09.003
Koteyko, N., Nerlich, B., and Hellsten, I. (2015). Climate change communication
and the internet: challenges and opportunities for research. Environ. Commun. 9,
149–152. doi: 10.1080/17524032.2015.1029297
Kwak, H., Lee, C., Park, H., and Moon, S. (2010). “What is Twitter, a social
network or a news media?” in Proceedings of the 19th International Conference
on World Wide Web, WWW ’10 (New York, NY: Association for Computing
Machinery), 591–600.
Lang, P. (1980). “Behavioral treatment and bio-behavioral assessment: computer
applications,” in Technology inmental health care delivery systems, eds J. Sidowski,
J. Johnson, and T. Williams (Norwood, NJ: Ablex), 119–137.
Lazarsfeld, P. F., Berelson, B., and Gaudet, H. (1968). The People’s Choice: How
the Voter Makes Up His Mind in a Presidential Campaign. New York, NY: Columbia
University Press.
Loewenstein, G. F., Weber, E. U., Hsee, C. K., and Welch, N. (2001). Risk as
feelings. Psychol. Bull. 127, 267–286. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.127.2.267
Lörcher, I., and Taddicken, M. (2017). Discussing climate change online. Topics
and perceptions in online climate change communication in diﬀerent online public
arenas. J. Sci. Commun. 16, A03. doi: 10.22323/2.16020203
Loureiro, M. L., and All,ó, M. (2020). Sensing climate change and energy issues:
sentiment and emotion analysis with social media in the U.K. and Spain. Energy
Policy 143, 111490. doi: 10.1016/j.enpol.2020.111490
Lowe, T. (2006). “Is this climate porn? How does climate change communication
aﬀect our perceptions and behaviour?” in Tyndall Centre for Climate Change
Research, Working Paper 98 (Norwich).
Luo, Y., Card, D., and Jurafsky, D. (2020). “DeSMOG: detecting stance in media
on global warming,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
EMNLP 2020 (Association for Computational Linguistics), 3296–3315.
MacKinnon, D. P., Krull, J. L., and Lockwood, C. M. (2000). Equivalence
of the mediation, confounding and suppression eﬀect. Prevent. Sci. 1, 173–181.
doi: 10.1023/A:1026595011371
Majmundar, A., Allem, J.-P., Boley Cruz, T., and Unger, J. B. (2018). The why we
retweet scale. PLoS ONE 13, e206076. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0206076
Martin, N. (2018). How social media has changed how we consume news.
Available online at: https://www.forbes.com/sites/nicolemartin1/2018/11/30/how-
social-media-has-changed-how-we-consume-news/
Mavrodieva, A. V., Rachman, O. K., Harahap, V. B., and Shaw, R. (2019). Role
of social media as a soft power tool in raising public awareness and engagement in
addressing climate change. Climate 7, 122. doi: 10.3390/cli7100122
Frontiers in Psychology
14
frontiersin.org


Sanford et al.
10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1099331
Meijnders, A. L., Midden, C. J. H., and Wilke, H. A. M. (2001a).
Communications about environmental risks and risk-reducing behavior: the
impact of fear on information processing1. J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 31, 754–777.
doi: 10.1111/j.1559-1816.2001.tb01412.x
Meijnders, A. L., Midden, C. J. H., and Wilke, H. A. M. (2001b). Role of
negative emotion in communication about CO2 risks. Risk Analysis 21, 955–955.
doi: 10.1111/0272-4332.215164
Merton, R. K., and Lazersfeld, P. F. (Editors.). (1950). Continuities in social
research: studies in the scope and method of "The American Soldier." In
Continuities in Social Research: Studies in the Scope and Method of "The American
Soldier." (New York, NY: Free Press).
Metaxas, P. T., Mustafaraj, E., Wong, K., Zeng, L., O’Keefe, M., and Finn, S.
(2015). “What do Retweets indicate? Results from user survey and meta-review of
research,” in Proceedings of the Ninth International AAAI Conference on Web and
Social Media (Palo Alto, CA: AIII Press).
Morozov, E. (2019). The brave new world of slacktivism. Available online at:
https://foreignpolicy.com/2009/05/19/the-brave-new-world-of-slacktivism/
Nabi, R. L., Gustafson, A., and Jensen, R. (2018). Framing climate change:
exploring the role of emotion in generating advocacy behavior. Sci. Commun. 40,
442–468. doi: 10.1177/1075547018776019
Newman, N. (2021). Digital News Report 2021. Technical report, Reuters
Institute for the Study of Journalism, Oxford.
Newman, T. P. (2017). Tracking the release of IPCC AR5 on Twitter:
users,
comments,
and
sources
following
the
release
of
the
Working
Group I Summary for policymakers. Public Understand. Sci. 26, 815–825.
doi: 10.1177/0963662516628477
Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2012). Emotion regulation and psychopathology:
the
role
of
gender.
Annu.
Rev.
Clin.
Psychol.
8,
161–187.
doi: 10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-032511-143109
Ojala, M. (2012). Hope and climate change: the importance of hope for
environmental engagement among young people. Environ. Educ. Res. 18, 625–642.
doi: 10.1080/13504622.2011.637157
Olausson, U. (2018). “Stop blaming the cows!”: how livestock production is
legitimized in everyday discourse on Facebook. Environ. Commun. 12, 28–43.
doi: 10.1080/17524032.2017.1406385
Parkinson, B., Totterdell, P., Briner, R., and Reynolds, S. (1996). Changing
Moods: The Psychology of Mood and Mood Regulation. London: Longman.
Pearce, W., Brown, B., Nerlich, B., and Koteyko, N. (2015). Communicating
climate change: conduits, content, and consensus. WIREs Clim. Change 6, 613–626.
doi: 10.1002/wcc.366
Pearce, W., Holmberg, K., Hellsten, I., and Nerlich, B. (2014). Climate change
on Twitter: topics, communities and conversations about the 2013 IPCC working
group 1 report. PLoS ONE 9, e94785. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094785
Pennebaker, J. W., Boyd, R. L., Jordan, K., and Blackburn, K. (2015). The
development and psychometric properties of liwc2015. Technical report.
Pettigrew, T. F. (1967). Social evaluation theory: Convergences and applications.
Nebraska Sympos. Motiv. 15, 241–311.
Pietraszkiewicz, A., Formanowicz, M., Sendén, M. G., Boyd, R. L., Sikström, S.,
and Sczesny, S. (2019). The big two dictionaries: capturing agency and communion
in natural language. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 49, 871–887. doi: 10.1002/ejsp.2561
Rotman, D., Vieweg, S., Yardi, S., Chi, E., Preece, J., Shneiderman, B., et al.
(2011). “From slacktivism to activism: participatory culture in the age of social
media,” in CHI ’11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
CHI EA ’11 (New York, NY: Association for Computing Machinery), 819–822.
Rozin, P., and Royzman, E. B. (2001). Negativity bias, negativity dominance, and
contagion. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Rev. 5, 296–320. doi: 10.1207/S15327957PSPR0504_2
Rucker, D. D., and Petty, R. E. (2004). Emotion speciﬁcity and consumer
behavior: Anger, sadness, and preference for activity. Motiv. Emot. 28, 3–21.
doi: 10.1023/B:MOEM.0000027275.95071.82
Runciman, W. (1966). Relative Deprivation and Social Justice. Berkeley, CA; Los
Angeles, CA: University of California Press.
Russell, J. A., and Barrett, L. F. (1996). Core aﬀect, prototypical emotional
episodes, and other things called emotion: dissecting the elephant. J. Pers. Soc.
Psychol. 76, 805–819. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.76.5.805
Sanford, M., Painter, J., Yasseri, T., and Lorimer, J. (2021). Controversy around
climate change reports: a case study of Twitter responses to the 2019 IPCC report
on land. Clim. Change 167, 59. doi: 10.1007/s10584-021-03182-1
Schäfer, M. S., and Schlichting, I. (2014). Media representations of climate
change: a meta-analysis of the research ﬁeld. Environ. Commun. 8, 142–160.
doi: 10.1080/17524032.2014.914050
Sharma, E., Saha, K., Ernala, S. K., Ghoshal, S., and De Choudhury, M. (2017).
“Analyzing ideological discourse on social media: a case study of the abortion
debate,” in Proceedings of the 2017 International Conference of The Computational
Social Science Society of the Americas on-CSS 2017 (Santa Fe, NM: ACM Press),
1–8.
Shearer, E., and Mitchell, A. (2021). News use across social media platforms
in 2020. Available online at: https://www.pewresearch.org/journalism/2021/01/12/
news-use-across-social-media-platforms-in-2020/
Shrout, P. E., and Bolger, N. (2002). Mediation in experimental and
nonexperimental studies: new procedures and recommendations. Psychol. Methods
7, 422–445. doi: 10.1037/1082-989X.7.4.422
Smith, H. J., and Ortiz, D. J. (2002). “Is it just me?: the diﬀerent consequences
of personal and group relative deprivation,” in Relative Deprivation: Speciﬁcation,
Development, and Integration (New York, NY: Cambridge University Press),
91–115.
Soroka, S., and McAdams, S. (2015). News, politics, and negativity. Polit.
Commun. 32, 1–22. doi: 10.1080/10584609.2014.881942
Stouﬀer, S. A., Suchman, E. A., Devinney, L. C., Star, S. A., and Williams Jr., R.
M. (1949). “The american soldier: adjustment during army life,” in Studies in social
psychology in World War II, Vol. 1 (Oxford: Princeton University Press).
Tausczik, Y., and Pennebaker, J. (2010). The psychological meaning of words:
LIWC and computerized text analysis methods. J. Lang. Soc. Psychol. 29, 24–54.
doi: 10.1177/0261927X09351676
Tay, D. (2021). Automated lexical and time series modelling for critical discourse
research: a case study of Hong Kong protest editorials. Lingua 255, 103056.
doi: 10.1016/j.lingua.2021.103056
Taylor, S. J., Muchnik, L., Kumar, M., and Aral, S. (2022). Identity eﬀects in social
media. Nat. Hum. Behav. p. 1–11. doi: 10.1038/s41562-022-01459-8
Thurman, N. (2014). Newspaper consumption in the digital age. Digit. J. 2,
156–178. doi: 10.1080/21670811.2013.818365
Tumasjan, A., Sprenger, T., Sandner, P., and Welpe, I. (2010). “Predicting
elections with Twitter: what 140 characters reveal about political sentiment,” in
Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, Vol.
4 (Washington, DC: AAAI).
Tyagi, A., Uyheng, J., and Carley, K. M. (2020). “Aﬀective polarization in online
climate change discourse on Twitter,” in 2020 IEEE/ACM International Conference
on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM) (IEEE), 443–447.
Tyler, T. R., and Smith, H. J. (1998). “Social justice and social movements,” in
Handbook of Social Psychology, eds D. Gilbert, S. Fiske, and G. Lindzey (New York,
NY: McGraw-Hill).
van Zomeren, M., Pauls, I. L., and Cohen-Chen, S. (2019). Is hope good
for motivating collective action in the context of climate change? Diﬀerentiating
hope’s emotion- and problem-focused coping functions. Glob. Environ. Change 58,
101915. doi: 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2019.04.003
Walker, I., and Smith, H. J. (2002). Relative Deprivation: Speciﬁcation,
Development, and Integration. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Walker, M., and Matsa, K. E. (2021). News consumption across social media
in 2021. Available online at: https://www.pewresearch.org/journalism/2021/09/20/
news-consumption-across-social-media-in-2021/
Wang, J., Yang, X., He, Z., Wang, J., Bao, J., and Gao, J. (2022). The impact
of positive emotional appeals on the green purchase behavior. Front. Psychol. 13,
716027. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.716027
Watson, D., and Clark, L. A. (1994). “Emotions, moods, traits, and
temperaments: Conceptual distinctions and empirical ﬁndings,” in The Nature of
Emotion, eds P. Ekman and R. J. Davidson (Oxford: Oxford University Press),
89–93.
Wiest, S. L., Raymond, L., and Clawson, R. A. (2015). Framing, partisan
predispositions, and public opinion on climate change. Glob. Environ. Change 31,
187–198. doi: 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.12.006
Williams, H. T. P., McMurray, J. R., Kurz, T., and Hugo Lambert, F.
(2015). Network analysis reveals open forums and echo chambers in social
media discussions of climate change. Glob. Environ. Change 32, 126–138.
doi: 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.03.006
Zelezny, L. C., Chua, P.-P., and Aldrich, C. (2000). New ways of
thinking
about
environmentalism:
elaborating
on
gender
diﬀerences
in
environmentalism.
J.
Soc.
Issues
56,
443–457.
doi:
10.1111/0022-4537.
00177
Zhu, X., Kim, Y., and Park, H. (2020). Do messages spread widely also
diﬀuse fast? Examining the eﬀects of message characteristics on information
diﬀusion.
Comput.
Hum.
Behav.
103,
37–47.
doi:
10.1016/j.chb.2019.
09.006
Frontiers in Psychology
15
frontiersin.org
