 
Selected Papers of #AoIR2021:  
The 22nd Annual Conference of the  
Association of Internet Researchers 
Virtual Event / 13-16 Oct 2021  
 
 
Suggested Citation (APA): Magnani, M., Segerberg, A. (2021, October). Deep neural networks for social 
visuals: studying climate communication on YouTube. Paper presented at AoIR 2021: The 22nd Annual 
Conference of the Association of Internet Researchers. Virtual Event: AoIR. Retrieved from 
http://spir.aoir.org. 
DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS FOR SOCIAL VISUALS: STUDYING 
CLIMATE COMMUNICATION ON YOUTUBE 
 
Matteo Magnani 
InfoLab, Uppsala University 
 
Alexandra Segerberg 
Uppsala University 
 
Visual politics is becoming increasingly prominent, in particular in online environments 
that are primed for visual content. Visuals are persuasive, affective, and may convey 
different information than text. As visuals become digitally augmented—replicated, 
modified and shared online—it is increasingly important to study what they convey and 
do: their content, social negotiation, and the role of platforms in their prominence and 
spread. 
 
However, research on visual politics has typically employed qualitative methods in small 
scale settings (e.g., focused on national newspapers in selected western countries), 
with approaches that do not easily expand to complex media ecologies and to questions 
with a global aspect, in which it matters how communication on an issue (e.g., climate 
change) or a communicative style (e.g., populism) is characterised, perceived and 
distributed across particular populations or across different parts of the world. A 
stumbling block has been the inability to automate the analysis of visual communication 
on the basis of actual images. Now, advances in deep learning in computer vision and 
image analysis open a potential path to large-scale analysis of visual politics on the 
basis of actual visual content. Promising work is starting to develop this potential in a 
variety of directions (see for example, Casas & Webb Williams 2019; Joo et al., 2019; 
Peng 2021; Zannettou et al, 2019). 
 
Harnessing deep neural networks in this context has the potential to make important 
contributions to understanding contemporary political communication. Nevertheless, it 
can also easily lead to misleading results. It is challenging to robustly integrate deep 
learning into the study of politics, and a particularly difficult area concerns the analysis 
of social visuals. In contrast to other application areas for neural networks more focused 
on object detection, visuals of social and political scenes are semantically rich and can 
convey complex ideas and narratives about power and politics (Brennen et al., 2021).  


 
This paper examines validity conditions for integrating deep neural network tools in the 
study of digitally augmented social visuals. We argue that the complexity of social 
visuals needs to be reflected in the validation process and its communication. With 
"social visuals" we refer to the social and political themes present in visuals, which we in 
this context infer empirically from objects (denotational content of the images) and 
labels (annotations recognised by the deep neural networks). A key validity concern in 
neural network research focuses on designing the structure of networks that can 
accurately replicate the relation between some input data and an output classification. 
In this case, the data is assumed to be unproblematic and the focus is on building a 
valid classification tool. A second key validity concern focuses on the challenges of 
obtaining good data (e.g., correct and unbiased). In this case, even an accurate tool can 
give invalid results when it is executed on wrong data. Here we go beyond this 
dichotomy and focus on the interdependency between data and tool. We note that good 
data can be defined as such only with respect to it being representative of the themes 
(classes) that we want to identify. However, when we analyse social visuals, the 
operationalisation of the themes may develop while we are preparing the final analysis, 
as the processing of new content may lead to the revision of our analytical frame – so 
that a final definition of good data is not available until the end of the process, which 
itself relies on a tool which needs good data to be trained. Some new themes may even 
emerge during the analysis. In addition, the operationalisation may develop not just 
because of our interaction with the data, as they would in a small-scale, qualitative 
analysis, but also because of our interactions with the tool and the specific way in which 
it mediates our analysis. Here, the final empirical operationalisation is an artifact 
produced by this hybrid methodology involving the iterated interaction between 
researcher and computational tool. An important implication is that the conventional 
approach of performance assessment – i.e., counting errors – while a necessary 
validation baseline, is potentially misleading if used on its own. At the same time, the 
validation of the tool can also be used to better understand the tool itself and help the 
researcher to refine the analytical process.  
 
We explore our argument experimentally in the context of an ongoing study that asks 
whether the tendency to frame climate change as a remote problem is a global trend on 
YouTube. While it does not exercise conventional editorial control, its rankings matter 
for the visibility of contents on the site. This platform is a common source of science 
information, and has been criticized for amplifying science skeptics (although the 
evidence is mixed) (Avaaz 2020; see also Allgaier 2019, Bounegru et al. 2020). Iconic 
(but distancing) climate themes such as the polar bear in arctic landscapes and focus 
on elite people and events (e.g., the COP summits) involve tough cases of social 
visuals. 
 
For example, in Figure 1a we show the accuracy of a pre-trained network used to 
identify polar bears in YouTube video frames. A first analysis of performance on 
plausible datasets (google search, wikimedia commons, control data without polar 
bears) indicated a high accuracy of our classifier. However, testing on a different source 
(Greenpeace campaign pictures about polar bears) highlighted that the first datasets 
were capturing only a specific instance of the polar bear theme. The qualitative analysis 
of all errors also allowed us to generate hypotheses about different types of 
polarbearness (animals vs. activism vs. arctic environments). Adding one more dataset, 


 
we could corroborate our hypothesis about surroundings, showing that the network was 
recognizing pictures of glaciers as polar bears.  
 
A recurrent point throughout is the imperative that the uncertainties of the process are 
systematically communicated, not to undermine the quality of the results but to make 
them more precise. We use as starting point a possible representation of the distribution 
of YouTube polarbearness around the world, shown in Figure 1b. We use this example 
to discuss how to qualitatively and quantitatively communicate validity questions.  
 
 
 
References 
Allgaier, J. (2019). Science and environmental communication on YouTube: 
Strategically distorted communications in online videos on climate change and climate 
engineering, Frontiers in Communication, 4:36. 
 
Avaaz (2020). Why is YouTube Broadcasting Misinformation to Millions? YouTube is 
driving its users to climate misinformation and the world’s most trusted brands are 
paying for it. Avaaz report 15/01/2020. 
 
Brennen, J., Simon, F., & Nielsen, R. (2021). Beyond (Mis)Representation: Visuals in 
COVID-19 Misinformation, The International Journal of Press/Politics, 26(1): 277–299. 
 
Bounegru, L., De Pryck, K., Venturini, T., & Mauri, M. (2020). “We only have 12 years”: 
YouTube and the IPCC report on global warming of 1.5°C. First Monday, 25(2):1-20. 
 
Casas, A., & Webb Williams, N. (2019). Images that Matter: Online Protests and the 
Mobilizing Role of Pictures. Political Research Quarterly 72(2): 360 - 375. 


 
Joo, J., Bucy, E., & Seidel, C. (2019). Automated Coding of Televised Leader Displays: 
Detecting Nonverbal Political Behavior with Computer Vision and Deep Learning, 
International Journal of Communication, 13: 4044-4066. 
 
Peng, Y. (2021). What Makes Politicians’ Instagram Posts Popular? Analyzing Social 
Media Strategies of Candidates and Office Holders with Computer Vision, The 
International Journal of Press/Politics, 26(1): 143–166. 
 
Zannettou, S., Caulfield, T. Bradlyn, B., De Cristofaro, E., Stringhini, G., Blackburn. J. 
(2020). Characterizing the Use of Images in State-Sponsored Information Warfare 
Operations by Russian Trolls on Twitter. 14th International AAAI Conference on Web 
and Social Media (ICWSM). 
 
