DOI: 10.4324/9781003409748-11
Why Media Imagery of Climate Change is Relevant
Public and media communication is crucial when it comes to climate change. Journalistic ­media – in 
print, radio, television, or online – are still important sources of news about climate change for 
many people. In addition, social media from social networks sites like Facebook, Instagram, and 
Twitter to video-sharing platforms like YouTube and TikTok have strongly risen in importance, 
particularly (but by no means exclusively) for younger generations. Even though a considerable 
proportion of the public say they perceive the impacts of climate change in their everyday life 
and immediate surroundings already, media sources still play an important role in shaping pub-
lic perceptions and attitudes toward climate change.
In recent years, visualizations such as photos and infographics, but also memes, gifs, and 
short videos have become more important in news and social media. This applies to many top-
ics, including communication about climate change. Imagery is used more widely in climate-
related news. On social media, the importance of visuals has been heightened by the fact that 
several platforms are centered around visuals (like Instagram) or audio-visual content (like You-
Tube or TikTok). Visuals can serve as eye-catchers for audiences and users, generate and focus 
attention and engagement, and can be distributed easily across national, cultural, and linguistic 
boundaries (even though they have been shown to be interpreted differently in different socio-
cultural contexts). Ed Hawkins’ “warming stripes” and “climate spirals” visuals, indicating av-
erage global temperatures and their changes over time (Figure 8.1), are well-known examples. 
They have gained prominence in news and social media and are used across the globe.
Researchers have responded. Studies of climate-related media imagery have gained impor-
tance in recent years. They have focused on stakeholders’ use of climate change-related visuals 
(Wozniak, 2020), visual representations of climate change (Schäfer, 2020), and their uses and 
effects (Metag, 2020).
This chapter describes, first, how researchers have approached these questions, emphasizing 
the contributions of STS. It then summarizes the studies conducted on news media imagery of 
climate change, and social media imagery, respectively. Finally, it outlines future pathways for 
the field.
Analyses of Climate Change Imagery in STS and Beyond
Research into climate change communication started to grow in the 1990s and particularly in 
the mid-2000s. Soon afterward, studies on visual climate change communication appeared 
(see O’Neill and Smith, 2014 for an overview). Scholars analyzing climate-related visu-
als in news and social media come from different disciplines (such as sociology, geography, 
8	
News and Social Media Imagery of 
Climate Change
Analyzing the Role and Impact of Visuals in 
Public Communication
Mike S. Schäfer and Xiaoyue Yan
This chapter has been made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND license.


News and Social Media Imagery of Climate Change  67
communications, political science, or computer linguistics) and interdisciplinary fields like en-
vironmental studies. They mostly apply qualitative or quantitative variants of visual content 
analysis, visual framing analysis, or discourse analysis. Notably, they have mostly focused on 
print media imagery in English-speaking countries.
STS approaches play a role in this field, but not a prominent one yet. This may be due to 
STS’s strong focus on communication within science rather than public communication, and its 
perspective on news and social media as socially shaped technologies rather than as places of 
public debate. The same is true for imagery: While STS scholars have turned to visual aspects 
more strongly in recent years, they have concentrated on images and the surrounding social 
practices within science. As a result, STS and studies on public communication have intersected 
and collaborated only selectively so far.
Nonetheless, STS has a lot to contribute to the analysis of climate-related visuals, starting 
with some of its fundamental tenets. Its basic assumption that science and scientific develop-
ments are socially embedded and constructed and must be studied accordingly also applies to 
climate science. STS’s emphasis on news and social media’s sociotechnological characteris-
tics and their impact on communicators and audiences as relevant means for enabling societal 
debate and creating social meaning is important to keep in mind when analyzing any form of 
mediated communication.
Figure 8.1  The “climate spiral” and the “warming stripes”.
Source: Both developed by climate scientist Ed Hawkins (https://ed-hawkins.github.io/climate-visuals/).


68  Mike S. Schäfer and Xiaoyue Yan
STS also approaches imagery from a fundamentally constructivist point of view. It under-
lines that “seeing and recognition are historically and culturally shaped” (Burri and Dumit, 
2008, p. 299), and that “scientific images and visualizations are exceptionally persuasive be-
cause they partake in the objective authority of science and technology” because they may “ap-
pear universal and neutral while selectively privileging certain points of view and overlooking 
others” (Burri and Dumit, 2008, p. 299). STS emphasizes that this persuasiveness also applies to 
mediated, public communication, for example when scientific images are used and distributed 
beyond science among stakeholders or the broader public.
In addition to these general points, specific concepts from STS lend themselves well to analy-
ses of climate-related visuals and have partly been employed in analyses of mediated commu-
nication already. Examples are:
•	 Boundary work (Gieryn, 1999), which refers to practices through which different fields of 
knowledge and the boundaries between them are negotiated, often repeatedly and continu-
ously. This can be the fundamental boundaries between science and its surroundings, or ne-
gotiations about expertise and about the question of who is an expert in a given field. Related 
concepts are boundary objects (Star and Griesemer, 1989) or boundary organizations 
(Guston, 2001), which bridge different knowledge communities. The concept of boundary 
organizations has been employed to analyze public communication of scientific institutions 
and Science Media Centers, for example, and images have repeatedly been interpreted as 
important boundary objects.
•	 Science-related controversies, in which knowledge communities exchange and negotiate 
different perceptions of scientific knowledge or technological applications, are another focus 
of STS that has been taken up by scholars analyzing mediated communication. The lat-
ter have analyzed, for example, how advocates and opponents of stem cell research or hu-
man cloning hold clashing viewpoints, how different communities debated fracking, or how 
discussions about applications of artificial intelligence develop. Sometimes using methods 
developed in STS such as “controversy analysis” (e.g., Marres and Moats, 2015), they have 
aimed to reconstruct how stakeholders engage in public, how they try to make their views 
and positions prominent in news and social media, and how successful they are in doing so.
•	 A third focus of STS studies that lends itself well to analyses of mediated communication 
is the concept of imaginaries, understood as “collectively held, institutionally stabilized, 
and publicly performed visions of desirable futures” (Jasanoff and Kim, 2015, p. 4) that can 
manifest themselves in various ways and influence how people think and act toward issues 
such as climate change. Imaginaries can manifest in imagery as well. Such imaginaries, and 
their visual representations in news media or social media, can influence how members of the 
public envision the future development of scientific fields and certain technologies.
Prevalence and Characteristics of Climate Change Imagery: Findings from 
Research
Analyzing News Media Visuals of Climate Change
In recent years, more scholars have analyzed climate change visuals in news media. They have 
mostly focused on print media outlets and their online equivalents, including tabloids and 
broadsheet publications, and occasionally also television news. Most of them analyzed Western 
countries, particularly Anglophone countries such as Australia, the UK, and the US, but recently 
research has diversified to include some countries from the Global South.


News and Social Media Imagery of Climate Change  69
Scholars found, first, that the use of imagery in news media has been increasing. News media 
utilize more images and position them more prominently – which is true for many topics and 
also applies to climate change.
Second, news outlets throughout the world adopt relatively similar visual representations of 
climate change. Images depicting polar bears on (too) small ice shelves, national landmarks sub-
merged under water due to rising sea levels, or the joyous pose of world leaders after signing the 
Paris Agreement at the Conference of the Parties (COP) climate summit in 2015 have been used 
in news coverage around the world. Quantitative analyses have shown that in many countries, 
the most widely used images are those showing large-scale, harmful effects of climate change 
such as melting polar ice, floods, droughts, or mudslides. The second most prominent category 
is visualizations of politicians, celebrities, or stakeholders, which are often shown speaking at 
international summits or conversing with each other. Less common but still prevalent in news 
coverage are infographics that show temperature curves and other climate developments, im-
ages reflecting the causes of climate change such as greenhouse gas emissions, visualizations of 
impacts on citizens’ everyday lives, pictures of unspoiled nature, visualizations of activists and 
their actions, and images of solutions.
Third, studies on the effects of news media imagery have shown that this selection of visuali-
zations may be problematic. They have shown, for example, that the most widely used images 
of large-scale, harmful effects of climate change draw audience attention, but also give them 
a feeling of powerlessness and hopelessness, diminishing people’s perceived self-efficacy and 
their intentions to act. In turn, visuals that may be more potent in motivating action are utilized 
less frequently in news media, such as pictures of solutions or the everyday consequences of 
climate change.
Fourth, research has shown that the visual portrayal of climate change in news media is 
not only influenced by journalists and news producers, but also by stakeholders from politics, 
civil society, business, and science. Throughout the past few decades, a wide range of visual 
arguments and assertions regarding climate change have been generated strategically by envi-
ronmental groups and activists. For instance, the environmental non-governmental organization 
(NGO) Greenpeace first used visuals to reflect the potential dangers and destructions coming 
from the rising temperature in the 1980s and 1990s, then shifted its visual messaging to iden-
tifying the causes, responsible parties, and potential solutions to the issue in the late 1990s and 
2000s, and finally, it turned to pressuring policymakers. These climate visuals were widely 
adopted by journalists to explain the rather complex issue and engage the public. Another active 
group of stakeholders are climate scientists, who often employ infographics and photographs 
to visualize research findings for decision-makers and the public. A typical, influential example 
is the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) assessment reports that widely, and 
influentially, use imagery as heuristic cues to convey scientific messages. In recent years, stake-
holders’ use of visuals has evolved, with many turning to more audience- and impact-focused 
visualizations that sometimes move beyond the realms of environmental activism and climate 
research and into spheres like arts and advertising.
Fifth, visual content has been shown to have considerable influence on viewers, potentially 
more so than textual information. Scholars have analyzed the effects of climate visuals on audi-
ences’ awareness, emotions, and behaviors toward climate change. Regarding awareness, find-
ings show that images depicting the consequences of climate change are better comprehended 
by audiences and lead to a feeling that climate change is significant. It has been found that 
climate visuals – including audio-visual content like climate-related films and documentaries – 
can heighten audiences’ concerns about climate change, elicit positive or negative emotions, 
and influence audiences’ behavioral intentions. Studies exploring the affective and emotional 


70  Mike S. Schäfer and Xiaoyue Yan
impacts of visuals have shown that fear appeals (messages aiming to elicit fear by highlighting 
dangers and suffering), which often appear in climate change communication, can elicit nega-
tive emotions and stifle action – while other, less commonly used visuals (like depictions of 
solutions) evoke positive emotions and can improve people’s belief that they can take action to 
address climate change.
Analyzing Social Media Visualizations of Climate Change
The emergence and rise of social media have changed how issues like climate change are pub-
licly communicated, perceived, and engaged with. Social media have become important sources 
of climate-related content for many. They have changed the fundamental logic of public com-
munication by allowing for many-to-many communication, bypassing established gatekeepers 
like journalists, and enabling members of the public to author, distribute, share, or comment 
upon content and take an active part in the public discussion of climate change.
So far, however, only very few studies have analyzed climate change imagery on social 
media. They mostly employ discourse analysis, qualitative or quantitative content analysis that 
rely on manual coding and modest sample sizes (from one to 200 visuals). Often, they are case 
studies focusing on single well-known organizations or persons, like Greenpeace and Greta 
Thunberg, or prominent events like the COP summits. They frequently employ multimodal 
Table 8.1  Core findings from the research field
Analyses of News Media Imagery
Analyses of Social Media Imagery
Typical research 
approach 
Mostly quantitative or qualitative content 
analyses of print media imagery from 
Western countries.
Mostly manual variants of content 
analysis of small samples, usually 
from one social media platform. 
Core findings 
The use of imagery in news media has 
increased.
News outlets around the world adopt relatively 
similar imagery of climate change.
The selection of news imagery can be 
problematic.
News imagery of climate change is 
influenced by journalists, news producers, 
but also many stakeholders.
Visual content has considerable influence on 
audiences.
Visuals on social media differ from 
news imagery.
Number of videos supporting consensus 
views about climate change and 
skeptical videos differ considerably 
from platform to platform.
Activists and activist groups have been 
shown to use social media visuals 
extensively.
Different types of visuals receive 
different levels of engagements on 
social media.
Limitations 
Lack of multimodal analysis that is taking 
imagery as well as written text, sound, or 
video into account.
Focus often on case studies and lack of 
large-scale (e.g. computational) analyses.
Focus largely on English-language data and 
Western countries.
Mostly single platform studies, often 
analyzing Twitter.
Lack of quantitative and computational 
analyses.
Focused largely on English materials 
and Western countries.


News and Social Media Imagery of Climate Change  71
approaches, taking visual and textual attributes of posts into account. Several findings can be 
distilled from the field:
First, even though few studies have compared this systematically, visuals on social media 
seem to differ from news media imagery. On Twitter, memes, motivational quotes, and screen-
shots have been shown to be the most common visualizations of climate change, followed by 
portrayals of individuals like politicians and celebrities. Visualizations of climate change conse-
quences, the most popular visual category in the news, are less important on social media. When 
focusing only on “top tweets” (defined by Twitter as “the most relevant” tweets for a search 
query based on the platform’s “popularity” measure that contains interactions, shares, and other 
factors), the use of visuals changes. While the imagery in top tweets often portrays individuals, 
these are more often citizens rather than politicians and celebrities who are prominent in news 
media. Images of climate consequences and solutions are the second most prevalent category 
among top tweets, followed by images depicting protests and scientific imagery. Memes on In-
stagram and Facebook have been shown to call mostly for awareness and action against climate 
change, followed by memes attacking liberal and conservative political views and politicians.
Second, studies analyzing audio-visual content have shown that the number of videos sup-
porting consensus views about climate change versus climate-skeptical videos differs consider-
ably from platform to platform. A YouTube analysis in 2018 showed that among 200 randomly 
selected videos on climate change, the majority opposed the scientific consensus (Allgaier, 
2019). On TikTok, the science of climate change is rarely a topic, but a large majority of videos 
on the platform support the scientific consensus, often coupling sincere appeals with humor-
ous text or visuals when mentioning the issue. It is notable, however, that some widely viewed 
videos exist on TikTok as well that refute anthropogenic climate change, and that a substantial 
proportion of TikTok videos with climate-related hashtags are irrelevant to the issue. They just 
“hijack” the buzz generated by the hashtags to draw attention to themselves.
Third, activists and activist groups use social media visuals extensively to broadcast their 
views, mobilize their audiences, and illuminate the absence of news media coverage. This was 
especially true for young activists, who are more accustomed to social media logics. The prime 
example is activist Greta Thunberg who communicated her weekly climate strikes on social 
media and has become a global icon and an important communicator of the issue. She has been 
shown to frame climate change as a moral and ethical issue on Instagram and to use visuals 
to motivate collective action, for example, by depicting protest signs and smiling peers while 
engaging in activism. Activists sometimes come together and protest during important climate 
events like COP meetings. In their protest videos on YouTube during COP15, activists visually 
portrayed themselves as soldiers or freedom fighters. The visual discourse focuses on the nodes 
of war, injustice, and resistance. Among activist groups, Greenpeace uses three main visual 
themes on Instagram to communicate a “climate crisis” in Indonesia: climate crisis threats, an 
urgent need to switch to renewable energy, and calls for more environmentally friendly political 
regulations. Environmental NGOs also post advertisements about climate change on Facebook, 
in which they frequently combine texts on pollution and efficacy with visuals of climate impacts 
and texts about protest with visuals of collective action.
Fourth, different visuals receive different levels of engagement on social media. Social media 
allow individuals to become both content producers and reproducers by sharing, liking, and 
commenting on specific content. Therefore, understanding the drivers of social media engage-
ment is important for analyses of (visual) communication of climate change. Several scholars 
have focused on this question. They have shown that despite their infrequent occurrence, pro-
test visuals regularly received the highest engagement on Twitter, followed by people-related 
visuals. In contrast, memes, motivational quotes, and screenshots generated limited amounts of 


72  Mike S. Schäfer and Xiaoyue Yan
engagement despite their prevalence. On YouTube, videos in favor of the scientific mainstream 
perspective barely outnumbered those against it in terms of views. On TikTok, videos of natural 
disasters and the environmental effects of climate change typically get more views, likes, and 
comments than other videos. Although making up only a small portion of climate videos on 
TikTok, videos that spread misinformation about climate change earned many views as well.
Limitations and the Way Forward
Generally, researchers have paid less attention to climate change images than merited by their 
importance. Consequently, several of the findings above are less definitive than they should be. 
Since the amount of climate change visuals is clearly rising in news and social media and their 
effects on audiences are significant, more research is urgently needed in this field. In addition, 
this research needs to be more diverse – in the cases it analyses, the contexts and countries it 
draws them from, and the news and social media it focuses on. With their unique conceptual 
and methodological approaches, more STS research would be particularly helpful in providing 
an additional conceptual grounding.
In addition, current research on climate change communication in news and social media 
has clear gaps and limitations. Most research analyses print media and often focuses on single 
news media or social media (mostly Twitter) within each study. Even though visuals are dis-
seminated across borders and socio-political contexts, and can travel across language barriers, 
research continues to concentrate almost entirely on English-language materials and Western 
nations. Often media within cultures and nations more vulnerable to climate change are ignored 
such as coastal countries in south and southeast Asia. Despite the importance of understanding 
how climate visuals affect audiences, existing research frequently does not investigate impacts.
A significant gap in news media studies is their lack of multimodality. Studies usually con-
centrate only on visuals such as still images and photographs. But visuals function in concert 
with other modalities, such as texts, and can have varying effects on audiences accordingly. 
More studies examining news visuals in conjunction with other modalities should be conducted.
Social media analyses should go beyond Twitter and expand their view to include social me-
dia platforms with large user bases like Facebook and centered around visuals like Instagram. 
In addition, studies across platforms are required since different social media platforms have 
unique logic and affordances. Scholars should also pay attention to specific online visuals like 
memes, screenshots, and gifs and consider their potential for use by climate change skeptics. In 
general, the role of visuals for the dissemination of dis- and misinformation and climate-related 
conspiracy theories needs questioning.
Finally, the role of generative artificial intelligence, which provides original responses to user 
prompts based on supervised and reinforcement machine learning techniques, for the visualiza-
tion of climate change should be analyzed (Schäfer, 2023). Tools like DALL.E, Midjourney, or 
Stable Diffusion can already produce photo-like visualizations that could change visual com-
munication about climate change (among other issues) considerably.
Further Reading
Burri, R. V. and Dumit, J. (2008) “Social studies of scientific imaging and visualization.” In Hackett, E. 
J., Amsterdamska, O., Lynch, M., and Wajcman, J. (Eds.). The Handbook of Science and Technology 
Studies. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 297–317.
Metag, J. (2020) “Climate change visuals: A review of their effects on cognition, emotion and behaviour.” 
In Holmes, D. and Richardson, L. (Eds.), Research Handbook on Communicating Climate Change. 
Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing, pp. 153–160.


News and Social Media Imagery of Climate Change  73
O’Neill, S. J. and Smith, N. (2014) “Climate change and visual imagery,” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: 
Climate Change, 5(1), pp. 73–87.
Schäfer, M. S. (2020) “Introduction to visualizing climate change.” In Holmes, D. and Richardson, L. 
(Eds.), Research Handbook on Communicating Climate Change. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Pub-
lishing, pp. 127–130.
Wozniak, A. (2020) “Stakeholders’ visual representations of climate change.” In Holmes, D. and Rich-
ardson, L. (Eds.), Research Handbook on Communicating Climate Change. Cheltenham, UK: Edward 
Elgar Publishing, pp. 131–142.
References
Allgaier, J. (2019) “Science and environmental communication on YouTube: Strategically distorted com-
munications in online videos on climate change and climate engineering,” Frontiers in Communication, 
4: 36, pp. 1–15.
Gieryn, T. F. (1999) Cultural Boundaries of Science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Guston, D. H. (2001) “Boundary organizations in environmental policy and science: An introduction,” 
Science, Technology, & Human Values, 26(4), pp. 399–408.
Jasanoff, S. and Kim, S. H. (Eds.) (2015) Dreamscapes of Modernity: Sociotechnical Imaginaries and the 
Fabrication of Power. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Marres, N. and Moats, D. (2015) “Mapping controversies with social media: The case for symmetry,” 
Social Media+ Society, 1(2), 2056305115604176.
Schäfer, M. S. (2023) “The Notorious GPT. Science communication in the age of artificial intelligence,” 
JCOM – Journal of Science Communication, 22(2), Y02.
Star, S. L. and Griesemer, J. R. (1989) “Institutional ecology, ‘translations’ and boundary objects: Ama-
teurs and professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907–39,” Social Studies of Sci-
ence, 19(3), pp. 387–420.
