ARTICLE
OPEN
Do fossil fuel ﬁrms reframe online climate and sustainability
communication? A data-driven analysis
Ramit Debnath
1,2,4✉, Danny Ebanks2,3,4, Kamiar Mohaddes1, Thomas Roulet1 and R. Michael Alvarez2
Identifying drivers of climate misinformation on social media is crucial to climate action. Misinformation comes in various forms;
however, subtler strategies, such as emphasizing favorable interpretations of events or data or reframing conversations to ﬁt
preferred narratives, have received little attention. This data-driven paper examines online climate and sustainability
communication behavior over 7 years (2014–2021) across three inﬂuential stakeholder groups consisting of eight fossil fuel ﬁrms
(industry), 14 non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and eight inter-governmental organizations (IGOs). We examine historical
Twitter interaction data (n = 668,826) using machine learning-driven joint-sentiment topic modeling and vector autoregression to
measure online interactions and inﬂuences amongst these groups. We report three key ﬁndings. First, we ﬁnd that the stakeholders
in our sample are responsive to one another online, especially over topics in their respective areas of domain expertise. Second, the
industry is more likely to respond to IGOs’ and NGOs’ online messaging changes, especially regarding environmental justice and
climate action topics. The fossil fuel industry is more likely to discuss public relations, advertising, and corporate sustainability
topics. Third, we ﬁnd that climate change-driven extreme weather events and stock market performance do not signiﬁcantly affect
the patterns of communication among these ﬁrms and organizations. In conclusion, we provide a data-driven foundation for
understanding the inﬂuence of powerful stakeholder groups on shaping the online climate and sustainability information
ecosystem around climate change.
npj Climate Action  (2023) 2:47 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s44168-023-00086-x
INTRODUCTION
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), in the
latest Sixth Assessment Report (AR6), calls for immediate climate
action1. However, this report asserts that a signiﬁcant barrier to
tackling the climate crisis is rampant misinformation on social
media1–3. This is important, as globally, more than 4 billion people
use social media platforms for communication, including informa-
tion on climate action2,4. Climate change misinformation on social
media can be crude and direct, for example, spreading knowingly
false and misleading information5. Misinformation on social media
can also be more subtle and indirect; for example, corporate
greenwashing is a tactic used to persuade audiences that business
practices and products meet green standards while obfuscating
the negative environmental performance of a company6. Fossil
fuel ﬁrms are often accused of such obfuscation on social media
platforms7,8.
In this paper, we study subtle misinformation and conversation
reframing akin to greenwashing that allows the fossil fuel industry
to inﬂuence the communication of climate watchdog organiza-
tions on social media. While this study is data-driven and
observational, we show that the world’s top polluting fossil fuel
ﬁrms engage in redirecting and reframing the social media
conversation in the broader information ecosystem. This ecosys-
tem involves the primary intergovernmental organizations (IGOs)
and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) that operate in the
climate and sustainability space. While it is not surprising that
subtle forms of climate misinformation like redirection and
reframing exist, it is surprising to see that the primary watchdogs
for climate misinformation (IGOs and NGOs) may also be subject
to inﬂuence by the fossil fuel industry.
In the growing climate accountability literature, there is
increasing evidence suggesting that climate communications
through social media may rely on issue framing that can shift
the conversation to align with particular political or corporate
frames6,9–12. However, previous research does not adequately
explore the more subtle role that top fossil fuel ﬁrms may play in
propagating misdirected communication and how this may affect
the broader climate communication ecosystem. When corporate
reframing or redirection on social media occurs, how are other
signiﬁcant actors in the climate conversation inﬂuenced, especially
non-governmental organizations and intergovernmental organi-
zations? Furthermore, how do NGOs and IGOs respond (if they
respond) to the fossil fuel industry reframing social media
conversations? Our research investigates the communication
interactions on social media between the members of the fossil
fuel industry and the NGOs and IGOs that focus on climate change
and sustainability. We empirically unpack their reframing and
redirecting approaches.
Recent research examines how the top fossil fuel ﬁrms use
social media for greenwashing purposes13–15. Much of this work
centers on how these ﬁrms use social media to generate climate
disinformation “echo chambers” (where the same communication
agenda is reinforced through the interactions between different
stakeholder groups) or “ﬁlter bubbles” (where information is
selected and highlighted), leading consumers to believe a speciﬁc
(and ﬁrm-driven) discourse. This echo chamber effect emerges
through communication triangulation between the three-core
stakeholder groups5,6,14,16–20. In the literature, echo chambers and
ﬁlter bubbles are usually studied at an individual level. Still, a
signiﬁcant gap remains in analyzing the collective behavior of
stakeholder groups. For example, during the two weeks of the
1University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1TN, UK. 2California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA. 3Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. 4These authors
contributed equally: Ramit Debnath, Danny Ebanks. ✉email: rd545@cam.ac.uk
www.nature.com/npjclimataction
1234567890():,;


United Nations Conference of Parties-26 (COP-26), research found
that 16 of the world’s most polluting fossil fuel companies were
associated with more than 1700 climate misinformation ads on
Facebook alone, with 150 million user interactions, demonstrating
the virality of climate misinformation14,21.
Research suggests that fossil fuel ﬁrms use a variety of
messages emphasizing the idea that consumer behavior is the
leading cause of climate change7,13,22. Furthermore, these ﬁrms
are more likely to discuss decarbonization and clean energy in
their annual reports as green pledges rather than concrete actions.
Their investment portfolio often does not match their climate
rhetoric, which provides evidence of greenwashing and potential
reframing behavior8.
Increasingly, social media platforms also inﬂuence climate
activism in ways that can create disinformation echo chambers
through environmental extremism5,23–25. These echo chambers
fuel climate action polarization as reframed, and misdirected
climate narratives inﬂuence broader audiences5,26. These actions
encourage climate change denialism and fuel organized mis-
information campaigns at a systems-scale6,27–29. With limited
research in this area, it is difﬁcult to know who is involved in
online climate misinformation and its underlying communication
structure at a systems-level3,20,28 and consider its potential
neutralization30,31. This may undermine public risk judgments
about the seriousness of issues like online greenwashing, fake
news, conspiracy theories, or radical climate action. Understand-
ing the structure of social media communications between fossil
fuel ﬁrms, NGOs, and IGOs is a necessary ﬁrst step before we can
decide whether to develop possible measures, like regulatory and
policy design changes, self-regulation, or community engage-
ment, to name a few, to counter online misinformation5,20,31–35.
THEORETICAL FRAMING
We propose a simple theory to explain why key climate
stakeholders engage in discussion with each other and how their
incentives motivate their behavior. In our theoretical framework,
climate stakeholders inﬂuence the discussion and shape the
bounds of policy debate around climate as a means of achieving
their goals. For example, the incentives of fossil fuel ﬁrms include
protecting
their
proﬁts
and
avoiding
heavy
regulation
by
demonstrating to policymakers and the public that they engage
in sustainable behaviors (supporting13,15). IGOs have political
incentives, including promulgating policies that sustain the
environment and which may mitigate the effects of climate
change, while considering the political preferences of the public,
who might be more skeptical of climate action.
NGOs aim to reduce climate change, even at the cost of ﬁrm
proﬁts and political popularity. Each of these stakeholders will
reframe public debates to accomplish their goals. Fossil fuel ﬁrms
have incentives to highlight their sustainability efforts to appease
international regulators while trying to maintain proﬁts from their
fossil fuel activities. IGOs have incentives to inform the public
about the importance of climate policy and emphasize their
success in encouraging ﬁrms to engage in more sustainable
behaviors. NGOs have incentives to both inform the public about
climate science and raise awareness of perceived policy failures in
the surrounding area to punish political actors they view as
moving too slowly and ﬁrms they view as purely proﬁt-
seeking36,37. Thus, reframing the social media discussion is a
way for IGOs and NGOs to set terms of debate favorable to their
political and climate goals, which are at odds with the goals of the
fossil fuel industry. At the same time, the fossil fuel industry could
reframe the discussion to focus the online climate debate on their
sustainability efforts.
To deepen our understanding of the reframing of social media
climate conversations, we also examine contextual factors that
might inﬂuence online discussion among these agents. These
climate-stakeholder ﬁrms and groups may be communicating
online in response to other factors. That is, they may not be
engaged in a joint conversation but instead could be focused on
framing organizational reactions to extreme climate events or, in
the case of fossil fuel ﬁrms, their ﬁnancial or corporate successes.
We aim to describe the extent to which these outside factors
inﬂuence discussion as opposed to fossil fuel companies refram-
ing
the
discussion
themselves.
These
external
factors
are
important potential confounding factors in our theory of online
conversations between the fossil fuel industry, NGOs, and IGOs,
and thus we must account for their potential inﬂuences on the
interactions between them.
Thus, an important part of our analysis is to include external
factors like industry ﬁnancial returns and extreme climate events
in our models. This will allow us to account for these potential
confounding factors and test hypotheses regarding whether
external events are more of a focus in the online communications
of these climate stakeholder ﬁrms and groups.
Regarding industry ﬁnancial returns, there has been past
research using social media data like Twitter in models predicting
ﬁnancial systems38. As an exogenous factor, Bollen, Mao, and
Zeng39 have shown that different dimensions of user moods on
Twitter can predict the Dow Jones Industrial Average perfor-
mance. Similarly, Oliveira, Cortez, and Areal40 found that Twitter
sentiment and posting volume were relevant for forecasting the
returns of the S&P 500 index, portfolios of lower market
capitalization, and some industries. Thus, we will include measures
of the ﬁnancial market performance of the fossil fuel industry in
our analyses below.
Similarly, climate change effects, like extreme temperature
anomalies and heat waves, have been found to inﬂuence the rate
of tweeting amongst people living in the US41. However,
researchers stress that there is a strong need to develop a better
understanding of how actors like NGOs, IGOs, governments, and
the private sector in the climate governance space engage on
Twitter, interact with the public, and are themselves shaped by
such interactions. Such understanding of climate debates on
Twitter can inform climate governance research and advance
theory on how social media, through norm diffusion, opinion
leadership, and citizen and elite opinion formation, impacts
climate governance42. To account for the potential inﬂuence of
climate events on the conversations between fossil fuel ﬁrms,
IGOs, and NGOs, our dynamic models will incorporate information
about extreme climate events.
In doing so, we conceptualize that reframing can be measured
through interactions between these three groups on social media
platforms. Online communication from core stakeholder groups
(fossil fuel industry, IGOs, and NGOs) is vital to inﬂuencing the
public discourse on sustainability and climate change. This paper
empirically captures the degree of reframing of online climate
communication between fossil fuel ﬁrms, IGOs, and NGOs. We
predict how stakeholders will change their tendency to discuss a
topic online if one group increases their messaging. Our data-
driven research design uses a large sample of tweets, retweets,
and replies (n = 668,826, 2014–2021) from eight of the largest
carbon-emitting ﬁrms (see Table 1 for information about the fossil
fuel ﬁrms included in our study)43, and the 14 NGOs and eight
IGOs with a cumulative follower base of 9.6 million users
worldwide (see the section “Data and method” and Supplemen-
tary Section 1). Furthermore, we assumed Twitter accounts were
inﬂuential if they had at least 10,000 followers. Therefore, we only
selected the public Twitter accounts of these ﬁrms and organiza-
tions that matched this criterion (see Supplementary Table 1).
Given
our
theoretical
framework,
we
derive
three
key
hypotheses.
H1: We hypothesize that stakeholders will have more ability to
direct conversation over topics in their areas of domain expertise.
In our case, we expect NGOs and fossil fuel ﬁrms to respond to
R. Debnath et al.
2
npj Climate Action (2023)  47 
1234567890():,;


IGOs on policy; that IGOs and fossil fuel ﬁrms will react to NGOs on
climate action and environmental justice topics; and that NGOs
and IGOs will respond to fossil fuel ﬁrms on corporate sustain-
ability initiatives.
H2: We hypothesize that fossil fuel ﬁrms will be more successful
at redirecting the online conversation than intergovernmental or
nongovernmental groups.
H3: We hypothesize that the online communication behavior of
fossil fuel ﬁrms will be inﬂuenced by exogenous factors like
extreme weather events and stock market performance.
RESULTS
Structure and mapping of stakeholders’ online climate
communication
This section presents the results from our joint topic-sentiment
(JST) modeling, which provides the foundation for understanding
how information ﬂows between the three stakeholder groups in
our analysis. To measure both topical structure and sentiment
orientation, we use JST modeling to uncover and measure these
latent characteristics in the text data. We needed such a method
to better capture the context of the uncovered topics—for
example, while both corporate sustainability and climate action
might have some shared tokens, JST can distinguish between the
two by accounting for sentiment, an additional, relevant latent
layer in our setting. For example, we show the top-15 tweets from
the fossil fuel ﬁrms with the highest positive and negative
sentiments in Table 2 (the estimation approach is discussed in the
“Data and method” section).
Similarly, Fig. 1 shows the common topics and their sentiments
(positive, negative, and neutral) in the Twitter conversations
between the fossil fuel ﬁrms (industry), IGOs, and NGOs. In
particular, Fig. 1 shows the probability an organization discusses a
speciﬁc topic during the entire sample period. The ﬁgure
illustrates several critical differences in the frequency that these
organizations discussed on Twitter regarding the topics uncov-
ered by our model. In doing so, we note relative homogeneity in
the topics about which fossil fuel ﬁrms and IGOs tweet. In contrast,
NGOs are more heterogeneous on the topics they discuss on
Twitter.
We now discuss topic frequencies for each group of organiza-
tions with embedded sentiments. We observe, ﬁrst, fossil fuel
ﬁrms post tweets that promote their outside media and public
engagement with a neutral tone. This includes tweeting about
news segments and newspaper articles that positively affect the
ﬁrms. They are also more likely to tweet about actions taken to
mitigate air pollution with a positive tone (see Fig. 1 and Table 2).
Second, IGOs tend to post tweets that promote further Twitter
engagement and discuss climate action, both with a neutral
sentiment. They are also more likely to post about their opposition
to the Trump administration’s drilling policies and protecting
endangered wildlife, carrying a more negative tone. Third, NGOs,
many of which represent activist groups, are more heterogeneous
in their Twitter discussion topics. There are few discernible group-
wide patterns, except they tend to engage evenly across the
entire portfolio of topics. The topic distribution in low-dimensional
space is further illustrated in Supplementary Table 8.
Fossil fuel ﬁrms’ position in the online communications space
Figure 2 shows the impulse response functions (IRF) that estimate
the hypothetical increase in an organization’s likelihood of
discussing a topic in the face of a standard deviation increase in
another organization’s average topical propensity. These results
illustrate the following observations with respect to the study’s
hypotheses:
Hypothesis 1: IRF results in Fig. 2a are consistent with the
hypothesis that these organizations interact online. For instance,
Fig. 2a illustrates the industry’s inﬂuence on the online commu-
nication of non-governmental organizations. The ﬁgure depicts
the responsiveness of IGOs and NGOs to a hypothetical increase in
fossil fuel ﬁrms’ social media communication on the topics
uncovered by our JST model. Note that 30 percent of the IRFs are
signiﬁcant for IGOs’ response to a hypothetical increase in fossil
fuel ﬁrms’ discussing a topic.
Similarly, 13 percent of IRFs are statistically signiﬁcant for IGOs’
response to a hypothetical increase in fossil fuel ﬁrms’ discussing a
topic. A hypothetical standard deviation increase in fossil fuel
ﬁrms’ probability of discussing how they support STEM initiatives
and corporate sustainability results in a 5 percent increase in
NGOs’ average probability of discussing these topics, both
signiﬁcant at the 95 percent level. Stopping the XL pipeline,
opposing Trump drilling policies, divesting from fossil fuels, and
criticism of the Trump EPA all result in smaller 1 percent increases,
signiﬁcant at the 95 percent level. These IRF estimates are
hypothetical responses, so they do not imply fossil fuel ﬁrms
engaged regularly in these (often controversial) topics. To account
for this, our IRF estimates are scaled by the empirical base rate for
the probability that a group of organizations discussed this topic.
Similarly, IGOs tend to respond to the fossil fuel industry by
increasing their average propensity to discuss corporate sustain-
ability and climatological changes by 3 percent, signiﬁcant at the
95 percent level.
Figure 2b demonstrates the impact of NGOs on the industry’
and IGO’ communication. The ﬁgure depicts the responsiveness of
fossil fuel ﬁrms and IGOs to a hypothetical increase in NGOs’ social
media communication on the topics uncovered by our joint
sentiment-topic model. Note that 57 percent of the IRFs are
signiﬁcant for IGOs’ response to a hypothetical increase in NGOs’
discussing a topic. Similarly, 20 percent of IRFs are statistically
signiﬁcant for fossil fuel ﬁrms’ response to a hypothetical rise in
NGOs’ debating an issue. Results indicate a signiﬁcant impact on
online IGO communication over biodiversity protection; for
example, the IGO stakeholder group is ∼11 percentage points
more inclined to debate this topic.
Similarly, IGO correspondence is more likely to address issues
related to governance and city policies (see ‘Mayor’s action—City
Policy’ in Fig. 2b) in neutral sentiment. Similarly, the IGO
stakeholder group is ∼14 percentage points more likely to affect
NGO communication on climate action subjects (with neutral
sentiment). Renewable energy (positive sentiment), employment
opportunities (neutral sentiment), corporate sustainability (posi-
tive), and media interaction (neutral) are likely to inﬂuence an
NGO’s Twitter engagement by 12–16 percentage points.
Table 1.
Cumulative emissions of private fossil fuel ﬁrms (1965–2018)
in MtCO2e (million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent) and its global
Twitter followers (until September 2021) (Source: Ref. 43)
Fossil ﬁrm
Emissions (MtCO2e) Followers (until Sept
2021)
Chevron, USA
43,787
374,800
ExxonMobil, USA
42,484
328,100
BP, UK
34,564
106,700
Shell, The Netherlands 32,498
566,200
Peabody Energy, USA
15,783
8700
ConocoPhillips, USA
15,422
163,600
Total SA, France
12,755
16,000
BHP, Australia
10,068
56,100
Total
207,361
1,620,200
R. Debnath et al.
3
npj Climate Action (2023)  47 


Figure 2c depicts the responsiveness of fossil fuel ﬁrms and
NGOs to a hypothetical increase in IGOs’ social media commu-
nication on the topics uncovered by our joint sentiment-topic
model. Note that 53 percent of the IRFs are signiﬁcant for NGOs’
response to a hypothetical increase in IGOs discussing a topic.
Similarly, 33 percent of IRFs are statistically signiﬁcant for fossil
fuel ﬁrms’ response to a hypothetical rise in IGOs discussing a
topic. If the results were purely noise, this rate exceeds the 5
percent one might expect. Findings indicate that the industry is
likelier
to
interact
with
IGOs
on
media
engagement
and
advertising-related themes. For example, topics such as industry
support for STEM (∼8 percentage points in positive sentiment)
and gas company advertising (∼5 percentage points in positive
sentiment). Similarly, there is a notable inﬂuence of NGOs on IGOs’
Twitter communication,
speciﬁcally on
climate
action
(∼10
percentage points in neutral sentiment) and renewable energy-
related topics (∼12 percentage points in positive sentiment, see
Fig. 2c).
Hypothesis 2: Taken together, Fig. 2 helps to show the
interactions of all three groups in the online communication
space. Relatively large effect sizes in Fig. 2a relative to Fig. 2b and
c would be evidence consistent with this hypothesis. Whereas we
expected fossil fuel ﬁrms, a powerful interest group with billions of
dollars in resources, to be relatively more inﬂuential than NGOs
and IGOs in the online discussion space, we ﬁnd the opposite.
Based on our evidence from the IRF, we ﬁnd that IGOs and NGOs
are responsive when fossil fuel ﬁrms increase their discussion on a
selected number of topics, most strongly for corporate sustain-
ability and when the industry supports STEM initiatives. Yet, at the
same time, we ﬁnd that IGOs are responsive to nongovernmental
Table 2.
Illustrative tweets from fossil fuel ﬁrms and their estimated sentiment scores.
Tweets with highest positive sentiment scores
Tweets with highest negative sentiment scores
Firm name (username)
Congrats to Indigenous School Award winner Gordonvale
State High, recognizing celebrating achievements in #STEM
We are deeply sorry to everyone who has and will suffer
from this terrible tragedy: CEO Andrew Mackenzie
BHP (@bhp)
Read how our Iron Ore team are helping ecologists
understand more about one of Australia’s most unique bat
species
As with most issues in China, there are many facets to
the debt liability story
BHP (@bhp)
Hi Andi, we’re working to make all types of energy cleaner
better from renewable energy cleaner-burning natural gas to
advanced fuels new low-carbon businesses, we’re committed
to playing out part to advance a love carbon future provide
the energy the world needs
I am really sorry you had a bad experience at a BP-
branded site.
We will raise this unacceptable behavior with the dealer
BP (@bp_plc)
Affordable, reliable #energy is cornerstone of #development
helps improve quality of life for communities -Chevron VP
Steve Green #CSISGDF
Anti- #Chevron activists recruit phony paid protesters to
picket Chevron annual shareholder meeting
Chevron (@Chevron)
We are very proud to support @techbridgegirls
@ChabotSpace to encourage curiosity & interest in #STEM
#education in young women #EBWC #IWD
Chevron ﬁghts to prevent #malaria among the most
vulnerable in #Angola pregnant women and children
under 5
Chevron (@Chevron)
Lets help bolster the economy with lower, more stable
#natgas prices Learn more about #natgas economic beneﬁts:
“Fracking fears unfounded” says retired geologist
#natgas
Conoco Phillips
(@conocophillips)
The #ConocoPhillips SPIRIT of Conservation program is
seeking grant proposals to conserve breeding, stopover and
wintering habitats for #migratorybirds, and to provide
technical assistance to improve bird habitat conservation
practices on working lands
From an Indiana pipeliner: @WhiteHouse rejects
#KeystoneXL Sad day for U.S. worker
Conoco Phillips
(@conocophillips)
With our research capabilities and commitment to
innovation, we are researching new technologies to provide
more affordable, lower-carbon energy,
Chairman CEO Darren Woods #XOMAnnualMeeting
@foe_us Allegations we deceived the public on
#climatechange are misleading and baseless
ExxonMobil (@exxonmobil)
ExxonMobil Colombia helps promote non-violence, gender
equality good behavior among youth #IYD2014
Anti-oil activists drummed up false allegations against
@exxonmobil #Exxonknew
ExxonMobil (@exxonmobil)
RT @WorldCoal: #Steel is fundamental to a more #sustainable
world, helping to build lighter, more efﬁcient vehicles, new
highly efﬁcient
Without coal, American families will feel more pain at
the plug, akin to pain at the pump.
Peabody
(@peabodyenergy)
@PeabodyEnergy proudly supports @ArchGrants toward a
more robust #STL #startup culture
RT @NationalMining: Coal’s decline could mean more
power shortages #countoncoal #powergrid #economy
Peabody
(@peabodyenergy)
We are partnering with Shell LiveWire Top Ten Innovators to
create new award categories around disruptive energy and
sustainable supply chain ideas that will help uncover the
brightest and most innovative solutions for waste reduction,
as well as enable a lower CO2 future.
Climate change is real, renewables are part of the future
energy mix. But provoking a sudden death of fossil fuels
isn’t plausible #IPWeek
Shell (@Shell)
RT @Shell_UKLtd: How can we be sure that the projects we
support to protect and restore natural ecosystems actually
deliver the results
UK Telegraph article highlights Shell, call for more
action on oil theft in Nigeria, the Niger Delta‚ real
tragedy
Shell (@Shell)
We are proud to share a commitment to #sustainability with
@SolidiaCO2 as they develop more #sustainable concrete
RT @PPouyanne: The #Covid19 pandemic, the #Oil crisis
#Climate change 3 major crises, distinct and yet
connected, that we must
TotalEnergies
(@TotalEnergies)
To learn more on this new partnership, you can read our press
release,
#Elgin #gas #leak: #Total prepares operations to stop
the leak
TotalEnergies
(@TotalEnergies)
R. Debnath et al.
4
npj Climate Action (2023)  47 


actors (mainly activist groups) in the same way, especially for
corporate sustainability and climate action. Fossil fuel ﬁrms are
also responsive, particularly for corporate sustainability and praise
for corporate sustainability initiatives. Finally, NGOs are responsive
to hypothetical increases in IGOs’ probability of discussing
corporate sustainability, stopping the XL pipeline, and renewables.
The industry also responds to hypothetical increases on some
topics but with smaller magnitudes. They are most likely to
respond to hypothetical increases in IGOs’ probability of discuss-
ing corporate sustainability and praising corporate advertising and
media engagement on sustainability.
Other factors affecting fossil fuel ﬁrms’ communication
Hypothesis 3: Here, we expected extreme weather events to have a
negligible effect on online messaging because social media is
global and weather events tend to be localized, acute phenom-
ena. We also expected that fossil fuel ﬁrms’ online communica-
tions would be correlated with stock performance, as these
returns represent their bottom line (consistent with refs. 38,40). Null
effects for weather events in Fig. 4 and statistically signiﬁcant
effects on fossil fuel ﬁrms’ coefﬁcients in Fig. 3 provide evidence
consistent with this hypothesis.
Results show neither factor is strongly correlated with online
communication. In our VAR framework, we treat stock returns for
the fossil fuel ﬁrms in our sample as an additional endogenous
variable while treating weather events as exogenous controls.
Both are accounted for in the results reported in Fig. 2. To denote
weather events, we use the EM-DAT database (see the section
“Data and method”) of disasters to mark days where drought,
extreme temperatures, storms, and wildﬁres caused over 1 million
inﬂation-adjusted dollars in damage during the sample period.
Moreover, Fig. 3 shows that IGOs’ and NGOs’ strategic commu-
nication decisions did not respond directly to the top fossil fuel
ﬁrms’ stock market returns. We tested for potential changes at the
95 percent level. The IRF analysis shows that fossil fuel ﬁrms, IGOs,
and NGOs did not change their messaging based on daily average
stock returns.
Next, we examine the responsiveness of these organizations to
extreme weather events on their propensity to discuss speciﬁc
topics. The IRF analysis included controls for extreme weather
events like drought, extreme temperature, storms, and wildﬁres on
industry-IGO-NGO communication, shown in Fig. 4. Results for
drought (Fig. 4a) show null or weak effects across all sentiment
topics except a strong inﬂuence on the IGOs’ discussion on gas
company advertising (10 percentage points). Similarly, in the case
of extreme temperature, the IRF analysis showed no or weak
effects across all topics by the stakeholders (see Fig. 4b).
The IRF results for the association between extreme storms and
stakeholders’ online messaging also show null or weak effects
IGO
Industry
NGO
Negative
Neutral
Positive
CIF_Action
EU_ENV
IPCC_CH
IUCN
theGEF
UNEP
UNFCCC
WMO
bhp
bp_plc
Chevron
conocophillips
exxonmobil
peabodyenergy
Shell
TotalEnergies
350
c40cities
CANIntl
ClimateGroup
ExtinctionR
foe_us
Fridays4future
Greenpeace
IENearth
JuliesBicycle
NRDC
ProjectDrawdown
via_campesina
World_Wildlife
Climatological Changes
Criticize Trump EPA
Divest Fossil Fuels
Extinction Rebellion
Extreme Weather
Gas Station Customer Service
Oppose Trump Drilling Policies
Protect Endangered Species
Stop toxic/plastic waste
Stop XL Pipeline
Climate Action
Develop Climate Adaptation Plans
Emission Reduction
Fight Climate Change
IPCC
Job Offers
Mayors' Actions− City Policy
Media Engagement
Tackle Climate Change
Twitter Engagement
Air Pollution
Corporate Sustainibility
Gas Company Advertising
Indigenous Rights
Industry Supports STEM
Praising Corporate Sustainibility
Promoting Company Website
Protect Biodiversity
Renewables
Share Pictures of Environment
5
35
70
Topic
Frequency (%)
Fig. 1
Sentiment-topic frequency distribution across the groups. A heatmap illustrating the distribution of high-frequency sentiment-topics
for the social medial communications of the 8 fossil fuel ﬁrms (industry), 8 intergovernmental organizations (IGO), and 14 non-governmental
organizations (NGO). Details of the tweet username and top ﬁve associated words are presented in Supplementary Tables 1 and 2,
respectively. This heatmap was created using the ggplot2 v3.4.1 in the R programming language v4.1.3, further details about the dataset are in
the “Data and method” section. CIF_Action Climate Innovation Fund, EU_ENV European Union Environment, IPCC_CH Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, IUCN International Union for Conservation of Nature, theGEF Global Environment Fund, UNEP United Nations
Environment Program, UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, WMO World Meteorological Organization, bhp
BHP Billiton Limited, Australia, bp_plc British Petroleum Company PLC, United Kingdom, Chevron Chevron Corporation, United States,
conocophilips ConocoPhillips Company, United States, exxonmobil ExxonMobil Corporation, United States, peabodyenergy Peabody Energy,
United States, Shell Shell PLC, United Kingdom, TotalEnergies TotalEnergies SE, France, 350 350.org, c40cities C40 Cities, CANIntl Climate
Action Network International, ClimateGroup Climate Group, ExtinctionR Extinction Rebellion, foe_us Friend of Earth, IENearth International
Indigenous Network, JuliesBicycle Julies Bicycle, NRDC Natural Resources Defence Council, ProjectDrawdown Project Drawdown,
World_Wildlife World Wildlife Fund, Fridays4future Fridays for Future, Greenpeace Greenpeace, Via_campesina La Via Campesina, IGO
Intergovernmental Organization, Industry Fossil fuel ﬁrms, and NGO Non-governmental Organization.
R. Debnath et al.
5
npj Climate Action (2023)  47 


across all sentiment-topics, except IGO-led topics associated with
gas station customer service (∼7 percentage points) and industry’s
messaging on company advertising (∼4.5 percentage points, see
Fig.
4c).
Similarly,
wildﬁres
did
not
inﬂuence
the
industry–IGO–NGO online communication for most sentiment-
topics with signiﬁcant effects. However, a signiﬁcant effect was
seen across NGOs’ propensity to discuss topics related to the
protection of biodiversity (5 percentage points) and the industry’s
greater propensity to discuss gas company advertising by 5.5
percentage points (see Fig. 4d). Thus, fossil fuel ﬁrms’ advertising
and public relations are highly likely online messaging topics
when stakeholders discuss extreme weather events.
DISCUSSION
In this study, we analyzed the online social media communication
structures of the top eight largest greenhouse gas-emitting ﬁrms
in the fossil fuel industry, 14 non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), and eight inter-governmental organizations (IGOs) with a
total of 9.6 million followers
worldwide. We tested
three
hypotheses related to the nature of the online interactions of
these stakeholders concerning climate change and sustainability
messaging. First, utilizing natural language processing-driven joint
sentiment-topic (JST) modeling and vector autoregression (VAR),
we empirically analyzed the inﬂuence of industry–IGOs–NGOs on
sustainability and climate-related themes on Twitter between
2014 and 2021 (n = 668,826). Moreover, the VAR results demon-
strated that the directionality of online communication is neither
inﬂuenced by the industry’s stock performance nor impacted by
extreme weather occurrences such as storms, drought, wildﬁres,
and high temperatures.
We used JST modeling to reduce the dimensionality of our text
dataset to 30 discernible sentiment topics, built from 668,826
tweets. We ﬁnd substantial discussion amongst fossil fuel ﬁrms,
IGOs, and NGOs regarding sustainability and climate issues (see
Fig. 1). Yet, climatological changes, criticism of Trump’s drilling
and environmental protection policies, divestment from fossil
fuels, extreme weather, and gas station customer service were
mentioned at least 70% of the time in the online communication
space of the industry, with negative sentiment embeddings.
Similarly, the most prevalent negative sentiment topics (with more
than 85% repetition) among the IGOs’ tweets were related to the
conservation of endangered species, resistance to Trump’s drilling
policy, and extreme weather events.
At least 80% of the NGOs’ online communication characterized
by negative sentiments were around stopping toxic and plastic
waste, extreme weather, fossil fuel divestment, and Trump’s
environmental protection initiatives (see Fig. 1). Therefore, we
revealed a structural distinction between industry, IGOs, and NGOs
regarding online social media communication themes.
Fig. 2
Estimated stakeholders’ inﬂuence on climate and sustainability topics. Impulse response functions (IRFs) for sentiment-topic
predicted in the industry–IGO–NGO online communication space, a the predicted response by NGOs and IGOs to fossil fuel ﬁrms, b the
predicted response by fossil fuel ﬁrms and IGOs to NGOs, and c the predicted response by fossil fuel ﬁrms and NGOs to IGOs. Bootstrapped 95
percent conﬁdence intervals (CI) are provided. This shows the predicted change in the probability of discussing the sentiment topics
discussed by fossil fuel ﬁrms, IGO, and NGOs in response to a standard deviation change of each entity of those discussing a speciﬁc topic. The
results where bootstrapped 95-percent CI are statistically signiﬁcant in the ﬁrst period after the initial impulse is shown. Error bars show
measurement uncertainty with 95-percent Bootstrapped CIs. Additional information on the daily propensity of this topic discussion is
provided in Supplementary Fig. 4 and Supplementary Section 3. IGO Intergovernmental Organization, Industry Fossil fuel ﬁrms, and NGO
Non-governmental Organization.
R. Debnath et al.
6
npj Climate Action (2023)  47 


The impulse response function (IRF) analysis from the VAR
model illustrates the inﬂuence of fossil fuel ﬁrms on IGOs and
NGOs’ (and vice versa) social media communication at 95%
conﬁdence levels. We found that climate stakeholders inﬂuence
other stakeholders within their respective topical domains. When
fossil fuel ﬁrms increase their online discussion of corporate
sustainability and corporate STEM initiative-related topics, NGOs
are predicted to be ∼8 percentage points more likely to discuss it
over the following week (see Fig. 2a). Consistent with our
hypotheses (Hypothesis 1), our analysis offers observational
evidence that the top polluting fossil fuel ﬁrms are responsive
to online communication by NGOs on topics associated with
environmental justice and climate change themes. IGOs were the
most responsive group, with predicted increases of 10–20
percentage points in their probability of discussing topics related
to climate action if NGOs increase their discussion of those topics.
In response to IGOs, Fig. 2c shows that fossil fuel ﬁrms and
NGOs are responsive to policy issues, such as promoting renew-
ables, stopping the XL pipeline, and opposing the Trump
administration’s drilling policies. NGOs are particularly responsive
to increases in IGOs’ propensity to discuss climate action
initiatives. These ﬁndings are consistent with our ﬁrst hypothesis.
Furthermore, this ﬁnding dovetails with Supran and Oreskes’s13
analysis of ExxonMobil’s climate communication. They found that
the company had publicly overemphasized (a reframing behavior)
some terms and topics associated with greenwashing while
avoiding others as a form of climate misinformation.
Contrary to Hypothesis 2, NGOs have more sway over online
conversations according to our VAR framework. Despite being less
well-funded and with fewer institutional levers of power, these
groups can inﬂuence the online discourse on climate change and
sustainability. Moreover, they can do so more than fossil fuel ﬁrms
and intergovernmental organizations. This ﬁnding can be due to a
greater number of Twitter followers associated with NGO user
accounts.
Our ﬁndings related to Hypothesis 3 are mixed. Beyond evidence
for the null correlations between extreme weather events and
online discourse, we also show in Fig. 3 that stock returns are
largely uncorrelated with online communications. Not surprisingly,
IGOs and NGOs are unmoved by stock market performance. Still, it
is surprising there is no discernible relationship for fossil fuel ﬁrms
since maximizing ﬁnancial performance is one of a private
corporation’s primary objectives. There are a few possible
explanations: ﬁrst, the time series data contain latent relations
not captured by our VAR models. We ﬁnd this unconvincing, as
our analysis allows for a highly ﬂexible time series structure,
including lags. This null evidence leads us to believe that even if
there is a relationship, it is likely to be of a small magnitude. A
second and more plausible explanation is that corporate public
relations strategies are driven by long-term messaging goals
unrelated to the company’s actual ﬁnancial performance. This
explanation suggests how the fossil fuel industry might capitalize
on green narratives for climate action and sustainability, ultimately
avoiding messages directly linked to their ﬁnancial situation (also
reported by refs. 14,36,38,40,42).
Our paper contributes to the growing literature on climate
accountability by advancing the understanding of “reframing” by
inﬂuential stakeholders on social media platforms, as they aim to
inﬂuence online climate and sustainability communications. We
envisage countering such subtle climate communication refram-
ing through regulatory and design changes on social media
platforms, which would enable them to be more exhaustive and
transparent. In addition, self-regulation and community engage-
ment around such reframing behavior might motivate behavioral
design changes34,44 to support individuals’ assessment of the
information they access—a vital element to generate consensus
around climate action.
This paper suggests future opportunities to explore whether
these macro-level discourses between core stakeholder groups
lead to opinion or behavior change. Future work also involves the
development of data-driven frameworks to derive a typology of
the structure of climate misinformation based on how inﬂuential
stakeholders communicate on online platforms. Future research
could also examine the data-driven value chain of climate and
sustainability information that feeds these stakeholder groups.
Our study has potential limitations. For instance, lexicon-based
sentiment analysis has limitations in capturing the true language
meaning and small changes if the words are changed due to their
annotation
and
coding
deﬁnitions.
This
remains
an
open
challenge with discriminative NLP models. In addition, Twitter
may be subject to demographic biases. In this paper, we limited
such biases by analyzing the entire Twitter corpus of the
Industry
IGO
NGO
Industry Supports STEM
Climate Action
Praising Corporate Sustainibility
Indigenous Rights
Gas Company Advertising
Protect Biodiversity
Mayors' Actions− City Policy
Air Pollution
Criticize Trump EPA
Climatological Changes
Renewables
Stop toxic/plastic waste
Corporate Sustainibility
Stop XL Pipeline
IPCC
Extinction Rebellion
Gas Station Customer Service
Divest Fossil Fuels
Tackle Climate Change
Media Engagement
Extreme Weather
Emission Reduction
Share Pictures of Environment
Develop Climate Adaptation Plans
Twitter Engagement
Oppose Trump Drilling Policies
Promoting Company Website
Job Offers
Protect Endangered Species
Fight Climate Change
−10
−5
0
5
Stock Performance's Influence
 on Industry/IGOs/NGOs
Sentiment−Topic
Fig. 3
Inﬂuence of stock market performance on stakeholders’
online communication. Estimated impulse response functions (IRFs)
for sentiment-topics associated with a positive standard deviation
shock to large fossil fuel ﬁrms’ average stock market returns.
Bootstrapped 95 percent conﬁdence intervals are shown. The results
where the 95 percent CI is statistically signiﬁcant in the ﬁrst period
are shown. Error bars show measurement uncertainty with 95-
percent Bootstrapped CIs. The average daily stock market returns
are shown in Supplementary Fig. 5 with summary statistics in
Supplementary
Table
4.
IGO
Intergovernmental
Organization,
Industry fossil fuel ﬁrms, and NGO non-governmental organization.
R. Debnath et al.
7
npj Climate Action (2023)  47 


concerned organizations to capture the more extensive cross-
sectional breadth of online communication and embedded
valence shifters in the tweets’ semantic structure. We also limit
biases
using
weakly
supervised
and
unsupervised
learning
methods (like the JST), which require limited human intervention
and training data. Furthermore, we validated our extracted
sentiment-topic scores using multiple human readers to reduce
lexicon-based discrepancies. Other methods can be used to
reduce the dimensionality of social media conversations, for
example, the structural topic model, large-language models, and
transformer-based
approaches.
As
we
have
shown,
weakly
supervised approaches like the JST can identify topics and
produce sensible results without utilizing potentially biased and
expensive human-labeled training data. Whether neural network-
based large-language and generative AI models might be useful is
an area for future research. A ﬁnal limitation regards our
assumption that a greater number of followers on Twitter means
a more signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the communication that motivated
the selection of fossil fuel ﬁrms, IGOs, and NGOs.
Our observational research shows that social media data helps
study industry-level behavior on climate change and sustainability
and its propensity to inﬂuence the communication of other crucial
stakeholder
groups,
potentially
affecting
consensus
around
effective climate action. In sum, our paper provides a new
direction for understanding the structure of the online climate and
sustainability information ecosystem using social media big data.
DATA AND METHOD
To empirically consider our hypotheses, we use natural language
processing (NLP) in a new way to measure information ﬂows in
stakeholders’ climate communications on social media. First, we
use the joint sentiment-topic (JST) methodology to determine the
topical structure of the social media conversation between the
three-climate stakeholder groups45,46. Then, we take the topical
proportions uncovered by the JST model and employ dimensional
reduction to quantify and visualize the discussion space for these
stakeholders, examine interactions in their communication, and
identify the triggers that inﬂuence the reframing of online
communication (see Supplementary Section 2).
With the results of the NLP modeling, we then investigate who
leads and who follows in social media debates about speciﬁc
climate and sustainability topics. We examine the primary topics
of IGOs and NGOs and their sensitivity to the industry’s propensity
to drive the conversation using vector autoregression (VAR). We
control for considerations exogenous to the communication
environment, such as extreme weather events and the industry’s
stock market performance. Using impulse response functions (IRF)
calculated from the VAR model (see Supplementary Section 3), we
establish quantiﬁable associations between climate-related com-
munication among large fossil-fuel ﬁrms, IGOs, and NGOs. These
methodological
steps
are
discussed
below,
with
additional
supporting details in the Supplementary Information. For details
on the vars v1.5-9 package used to implement the time series
analysis in R, please refer to refs. 47,48.
This research was reviewed by the Institutional Review Board at
the Judge Business School, University of Cambridge (20-064) and
at the California Institute of Technology (21-1169). Twitter was
informed about this research during the v2API request.
Data source
We use the Twitter (now known as X) v2API endpoints to collect
daily time-series tweets for the stakeholder groups shown in
Supplementary Table 1 between January 2014 to September 2021,
accessed
using
the
academictwitterR
v0.3.0
package49
in
R-programming language. As a search query, we used the
username of the ofﬁcial global Twitter accounts of the organiza-
tions (see Supplementary Table 1), as they had the largest follower
counts and most tweets were in the English language to reach
maximum users.
Fig. 4
Inﬂuence of extreme weather events on stakeholders’ online communication. Estimated impulse response functions for sentiment-
topics associated with selected extreme weather events based on EM-DAT’s publicly available weather datasets (2014–2021): a Drought,
b Extreme temperature, c Storm and d wildﬁres. Bootstrapped 95 percent conﬁdence intervals are shown. The results where the 95 percent CI
is statistically signiﬁcant in the ﬁrst period are shown. Error bars show measurement uncertainty with 95-percent Bootstrapped Cis. IGO
Intergovernmental Organization, Industry fossil fuel ﬁrms, and NGO non-governmental organization.
R. Debnath et al.
8
npj Climate Action (2023)  47 


More speciﬁcally, in the “industry” category, we included
investor-owned top polluting fossil fuel ﬁrms in this study43,50.
The global spread of ﬁrms contains BP (UK), Chevron (USA), BHP
(Australia), ConocoPhillips (USA), ExxonMobil (USA), Peabody
Energy (USA), Shell (The Netherlands) and Total Energies (France).
Cumulatively, these ﬁrms emitted ∼207,361 million tonnes of
carbon dioxide equivalent (MtCO2e) between 1965 and 2018
(Table 1).
We curated the list of environmental and intergovernmental
(IGOs) and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) based on
organizational size using the publicly available University of
California Berkeley’s database51 and DonorBox’s 2021 classiﬁcation
of top environmental protection non-proﬁts from their portfolio of
more than 50,000 organizations in 96 countries52. In the next step,
we manually ﬁltered the NGOs and IGOs list based on two criteria:
(a) English-language Twitter user accounts that have at least
10,000 followers, and (b) availability of seven years (January
2014–September 2021) of time-series historical tweets. Our ﬁnal
dataset contained a cumulative follower base of 9.6 million users
worldwide and 728,967 tweets. Detailed descriptive characteristics
of our dataset are presented in Supplementary Tables 1 and 2. We
acknowledge
that
the
Twitter
dataset
may
contain
some
unintentional biases. For example, our data may contain tweets
from malicious users artiﬁcially causing a topic or a hashtag to
trend, or tweets that misrepresent already trending items using
bots53. We follow established best practice guidelines to mitigat-
ing such biases54,55.
The daily stock market return data are the calculated (or
derived) ﬁrm equity prices based on the daily stock market returns
data from the CRSP US Stock Database ©2021, provided by the
Centre for Research in Security Prices (CRSP), The University of
Chicago Booth School of Business. In addition, stock market
returns summary statistics are provided in Supplementary Table 4
with average daily returns in Supplementary Fig. 5. The extreme
weather
dataset
is
extracted
from
EM-DAT
(https://
www.emdat.be). It is a database of global disasters maintained
by the Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters
(CRED) at the School of Public Health of the Université Catholique
de Louvain located in Brussels, Belgium, maintaining records of
historical global disasters from 1900 of meteorological, epidemio-
logical, and other natural origin.
Pre-processing
We follow best practices for pre-processing text-as-data56–58. To
ensure we have the right number of features; we stem the tokens
that will enter the JST bag-of-words model. For valid inference
from text data, researchers should strive for both enough
common words such that there is shared variation amongst
documents. At the same time, they must balance this against the
need for enough unique words that are not shared amongst many
documents so that distinct topics can be identiﬁed by the
topic model.
We take the following steps to create a list of 1009 unique
words in our dataset, which has 330,412 tweets post-pre-
processing:
1. Drop all tweets that do not contain three unique words.
2. Stem all words to remove word endings to distill core
semantic meaning.
3. Find bigrams and trigrams and tokenize.
4. We drop all words that appear in fewer than 0.005 percent
of tweets in the corpus and in more than 50 percent of
tweets in the corpus, respectively, following the advice in
ref. 56.
The tweets were processed with an NLP workﬂow (following
refs. 25,59) using the tidyverse v1.3.1 and tidytext v0.3.2 packages
in R. The workﬂow consisted of text pre-processing, feature
extraction for n-grams, and sentiment analysis. The pre-processing
stage consisted of tokenisation, stemming, and lemmatisation. In
NLP, tokenisation refers to breaking down the given text into
smaller units in a sentence called token60,61. Stemming in NLP is a
morphological technique that breaks words into their root form61.
Finally, lemmatisation is another normalization technique used to
reduce inﬂectional forms of words to a common base form61. It
differs from stemming as it uses lexical knowledge bases to get
the correct base forms of words61. At this NLP pre-processing
stage, we removed the stopwords using the tm v0.7-8 package in
R. Stopwords are the most common words in any language (like
articles, prepositions, pronouns, conjunctions, etc.) that do not add
much information to the text. For example, common stopwords in
English are “the”, “a”, “an”, “so”, and “what”61. This workﬂow
extracted the cleaned base form of words and generated a
document-term-matrix (dtm) needed for further analysis.
The average tweet length in our corpus is 18.31. Post-
processing, the average unique tokens per tweet is 17.31 with
1009 unique words. The total number of unique tweets per
stakeholder group is 57,550 for industry, 50,059 for IGOs, and
222,813 for NGOs. We had an unbalanced selection of organiza-
tions in the NGO category (14) compared to eight each for the
fossil industry and IGOs, leading to more unique tweets.
As an initial exploratory text analysis, all tweets were analyzed
using the sentimentr v0.4.0 package in R to estimate the text
polarity sentiments at the sentence level and optionally aggregate
by rows or grouping variable(s). sentimentr is an augmented
dictionary lookup tool which attempts to embed valence shifters
(i.e., negators, ampliﬁers (intensiﬁers), de-ampliﬁers (downtoners),
and adversative conjunctions) in the NLP-driven sentiment
analysis while maintaining computation speed62.
Valence shifters affect the polarized words. For example, in the
case
of
negators
and
adversative
conjunctions,
the
entire
sentiment of the clause may be reversed or overruled63. The
tweet corpus analyzed here is from the global corporate accounts
of the fossil fuel ﬁrms, IGOs and NGOs, so accounting for valence
shifts was important to appropriately estimate the embedded
sentiments.
Joint sentiment-topic modeling (JST)
To understand the nature of online discussion between IGOs,
NGOs, and fossil fuel ﬁrms, we employ a topic modeling method
to uncover the rates at which the organizations in our dataset
discuss topics. The method both uncovers the topics and the
probabilities that each document belongs to each of the topics.
We know that online communication might have sentimental
inﬂection (certain words have different meanings in different
contexts), so we employ a topic model that accounts for this
sentiment, Joint-Sentiment Topic Modeling (JST). Detailed model-
ing speciﬁcation is shown in Supplementary Section 2 JST
Evaluation.
The JST model is similar to the Latent Dirichlet Allocation
algorithm for topic modeling, except that JST estimates topics k
conditional on a sentiment j. The JST model thus estimates three
latent layers (sentiment orientation, topic classiﬁcation, and word
probabilities belonging to both)45,46, which provides a critical
methodological advantage when assessing interactive semantic
exchanges, like Twitter messaging interactions across multiple
stakeholders. It is a Bayesian hierarchical mixture model with three
hyperparameters α, β, and γ.
The hyperparameter α is the prior concentration of the
sentiment-topic ki for a document before having seen any
documents from the corpus. Similarly, hyperparameter β is the
prior concentration of the sentiment-topic j for a word before any
words from the corpus are observed. And the hyperparameter γ is
the prior concentration of the sentiment labels sampled under a
document before having seen any documents.
R. Debnath et al.
9
npj Climate Action (2023)  47 


In our model, we estimated the unconditional probability of
each sentiment j as a weakly supervised model by placing a weak
prior over the sentiment orientations for a selection of common
words. This approach captured the entire discussion space of the
industry, IGOs, and NGOs on Twitter without relying on exogenous
covariates to uncover the latent space. Therefore, enabling us to
model Twitter communication at a systems level and examine the
industry-IGO-NGO systemic interactions.
A critical feature of the semantic structure extracted by the JST
is the distinct variation in how industry, IGOs, and NGOs
communicate on social media, even when projected into a lower
dimensional space. Therefore, we produced a probability distribu-
tion for every word and each of the 728,967 tweets in the dataset,
which can be decomposed as Eq. (1).
PrðWord ¼ w; Sentiment ¼ j; Topic ¼ kÞ
¼ PrðWord ¼ wjSentiment ¼ j; Topic ¼ kÞ
PrðTopic ¼ kjSentiment ¼ jÞ
(1)
This produced a vector of kj sentiment-topic probabilities and j
sentiment probabilities for each tweet so that the sentiment-topic
labels are independent.
In our analysis, we followed standard practice and set a
relatively small prior with the assumption that the tweets, given
their concise nature (maximum character limit is 280), are likely to
relate to very few topics at once45. Therefore, as β goes to 0, the
model converges to a model of a single sentiment-topic.
Furthermore, the limiting distribution gets uniform over the
sentiment-topic as β grows larger.
As mentioned above, we calibrate the model by optimizing the
coherence score that suggests the optimal number of topics is 30
(see Supplementary Fig. 2). In addition, we set the number of
sentiments to 3 (sent1, sent2, and sent3) following the paradig-
matic prior in ref. 45. It resulted in 180 conditional sentiment-topic
probabilities and three unconditional sentiment probabilities for
each tweet. We further illustrated the top 30 topics using
sentiment-topic occurrence frequencies (Fig. 1) and used the rJST
v1.3 package and default rJST dictionary for constructing the JST
model. Additional supporting details regarding the JST analysis are
provided in Supplementary Section 2, including an extracted
corpus of the top 5 topic words (see Supplementary Table 2) and
probabilistic topic labeling (emblematic) (Supplementary Table 3,
emblematic tweets). The topic proportions per information source
are presented in Supplementary Table 2.
Vector autoregression (VAR)
Our dynamic analysis of the Twitter sentiment-topics from the
fossil fuel ﬁrms, the NGOs, and the IGOs, was conducted using
vector autoregression (VAR). First, we evaluated the probabilities
of IGOs and NGOs to discuss each sentiment-topic in their daily
Twitter communications. We use an impulse response frame-
work from the time series VAR of topical probabilities derived
from our JST estimates. Building on a methodological framework
used in previous research64, our estimation strategy estimates a
VAR for each topic, treating each organization’s average
probability of discussing that topic and fossil fuel ﬁrms’ stock
performance, as well as a topic discussion under the inﬂuence of
extreme weather events as endogenous, using publicly available
EM-DAT database.
VAR is a time series technique that allows for the analysis of
how a particular time-series of data responds to its history and the
history of other time-series in the analysis, which has been used in
previous studies that examine the dynamics of multiple time-
series of Twitter topics64. VAR also allows us to simulate how
changes in one time series (“shocks”) may work through the entire
system of equations. As our data are stationary but censored
between 0 and 1 as in ref. 64, we follow’s ref. 65 logit speciﬁcation
for VAR. Supporting details about the VAR analysis are provided in
Supplementary Section 33, and speciﬁcally, Supplementary Fig. 3
provides details about stationarity.
Supplementary Section 3 contains more details about our time
series analysis and robustness check performed using Augmented
Dickey–Fuller Tests for Unit Root (shown in Supplementary Fig. 3).
In addition, it includes summary statistics for the daily propensity
of fossil ﬁrms’ Twitter activity on the primary topic in the analysis
(Supplementary Table 5). Similarly, Supplementary Tables 6 and 7
show summary statistics for IGOs and NGOs topic time series,
respectively. The daily propensity of the stakeholders to discuss
divestment from fossil fuels, renewable jobs, and extreme weather
is shown in Supplementary Fig. 4. The average daily stock return is
shown in Supplementary Fig. 4d, with stock market returns
summary statistics presented in Supplementary Table 4.
Using this topic-by-topic model, we measure the online informa-
tion ecosystem of the stakeholder groups in our dataset and data
from exogenous weather events, such as droughts, wildﬁres, storms,
and extreme temperatures. Using these model estimates, we
compute impulse response functions (IRFs) for the probability each
type of organization discusses a topic when another group increases
its average probability of discussing it. Speciﬁcally, these IRFs
estimate the hypothetical increase in an organization’s likelihood of
discussing a topic in the face of a standard deviation increase in
another organization’s average topical propensity.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The materials necessary to reproduce the results reported in this paper are available
at https://github.com/danielEban ks/. Energy-Industry-Greenwashing. Per the terms
of Twitter’s academic use policies, we will make available the tweet IDs for the data
used in this paper upon publication. Researchers can obtain the CRSP data from
https://www.crsp.org/. Publicly available extreme weather events data can be
obtained from EM-DAT (https://www.emdat.be). Alternatively, please contact the
corresponding author to request the dataset.
CODE AVAILABILITY
The code necessary to reproduce the results reported in this paper is available at the
following
GitHub
repository:
https://github.com/danielEbanks/Energy-Industry-
Greenwashing.
Received: 30 June 2023; Accepted: 16 November 2023;
REFERENCES
1. IPCC. Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working
Group III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (Cambridge University Press, 2022).
2. Turrentine, J. Climate Misinformation On Social Media Is Undermining Climate
Action (NRDC, 2022).
3. Debnath, R., Creutzig, F., Sovacool, B. K. & Shuckburgh, E. Harnessing human and
machine intelligence for planetary-level climate action. npj Clim. Action 2, https://
doi.org/10.1038/s44168-023-00056-3 (2023).
4. Rathje, S., Van Bavel, J. J. & van der Linden, S. Out-group animosity drives
engagement on social media. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 118, https://doi.org/
10.1073/pnas.2024292118 (2021).
5. Treen, K. M. D., Williams, H. T. P. & O’Neill, S. J. Online misinformation about
climate change. WIREs Clim. Chang. 11, https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.665 (2020).
6. Wetts, R. In climate news, statements from large businesses and opponents of
climate action receive heightened visibility. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 117,
19054–19060 (2020).
7. Supran, G. & Oreskes, N. Assessing ExxonMobil’s climate change communications
(1977–2014). Environ. Res. Lett. 12, 084019 (2017).
R. Debnath et al.
10
npj Climate Action (2023)  47 


8. Li, M., Trencher, G. & Asuka, J. The clean energy claims of BP, Chevron, Exxon-
Mobil and Shell: a mismatch between discourse, actions and investments. PLoS
ONE 17, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0263596 (2022).
9. Pérez-González, L. ‘Is climate science taking over the science?’: a corpus-based
study of competing stances on bias, dogma and expertise in the blogosphere.
Humanit. Soc. Sci. Commun. 7, 92 (2020).
10. Brevini, B. & Lewis, J. Climate Change and the Media Vol. 2 (Academic Publishers,
2018).
11. Feldman, L., Hart, P. S. & Milosevic, T. Polarizing news? representations of threat
and efﬁcacy in leading US newspapers’ coverage of climate change. Public
Underst. Sci. 26, 481–497 (2017).
12. CCDH. The Toxic Ten: How Ten Fringe Publishers Fuel 69% of Digital Climate Change
Denial (CCDH, 2021).
13. Supran, G. & Oreskes, N. Rhetoric and frame analysis of ExxonMobil’s climate
change communications. One Earth 4, 696–719 (2021).
14. Lewton, T. & McCool, A. Greenwashing on facebook: how the world’s biggest
polluters use social media to obfuscate on climate change. Time 2021, 6113396
(2021).
15. Supran, G., Rahmstorf, S. & Oreskes, N. Assessing Exxonmobil’s global warming
projections. Science 379, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abk0063 (2023).
16. Farrell, J. Network structure and inﬂuence of the climate change counter-
movement. Nat. Clim. Chang. 6, 370–374 (2016).
17. Boussalis, C. & Coan, T. G. Text-mining the signals of climate change doubt. Glob.
Environ. Chang. 36, 89–100 (2016).
18. Micheals, D. Doubt is Their Product: How Industry’s Assault on Science Threatens
Your Health (Oxford University Press, 2008).
19. Cinelli, M., De Francisci Morales, G., Galeazzi, A., Quattrociocchi, W. & Starnini, M.
The echo chamber effect on social media. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 118,
e2023301118 (2021).
20. Farrell, J. The growth of climate change misinformation in us philanthropy: evi-
dence from natural language processing. Environ. Res. Lett. 14, 034013 (2019).
21. Ranganathan, N. & Beltrán, M. eco-bot.net. Dale Vince, Robert '3D' Del Naja & Bill
Posters (2021).
22. UCS. Smoke, Mirrors & Hot Air—How ExxonMobil Uses Big Tobacco’s Tactics to
Manufacture Uncertainty on Climate Science (UCS, 2007).
23. Fownes, J. R., Yu, C. & Margolin, D. B. Twitter and climate change. Sociol. Compass
12, https://doi.org/10.1111/soc4.12587 (2018).
24. Pearce, W., Niederer, S., Özkula, S. M. & Sánchez Querubín, N. The social media life
of climate change: platforms, publics, and future imaginaries. WIREs Clim. Chang.
10, https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.569 (2019).
25. Debnath, R. et al. Conspiracy spillovers and geoengineering. iScience 26, 106166
(2023).
26. Lewandowsky, S., Ecker, U. K. & Cook, J. Beyond misinformation: understanding
and coping with the “post-truth” era. J. Appl. Res. Mem. Cogn. 6, 353–369
(2017).
27. Dunlap, R., McCright, A., Dryzek, J., Norgaard, R. & Schlosberg, D. The Oxford
Handbook of Climate Change and Society. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK
(2011).
28. Dunlap, R. E. Climate change skepticism and denial. Am. Behav. Sci. 57, 691–698
(2013).
29. Törnberg, P. Echo chambers and viral misinformation: Modeling fake news as
complex contagion. PLoS ONE 13, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0203958
(2018).
30. Cook, J., Ellerton, P. & Kinkead, D. Deconstructing climate misinformation to
identify reasoning errors. Environ. Res. Lett. 13, 024018 (2018).
31. Linden, S. V. D., Leiserowitz, A., Rosenthal, S. & Maibach, E. Inoculating the public
against misinformation about climate change. Glob. Challenges 1, 1600008 (2017).
32. Cook, J., Lewandowsky, S. & Ecker, U. K. H. Neutralizing misinformation through
inoculation: Exposing misleading argumentation techniques reduces their inﬂu-
ence. PLoS ONE 12, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0175799 (2017).
33. Kyza, E. A. et al. Combating misinformation online: re-imagining social media for
policy-making. Internet Policy Rev. 9, https://doi.org/10.14763/2020.4.1514 (2020).
34. UNICEF. Countering Online Misinformation Resource Pack (UNICEF, 2020).
35. Debnath, R., van der Linden, S., Alvarez, R. M. & Sovacool, B. K. Facilitating system-
level behavioural climate action using computational social science. Nat. Hum.
Behav. 7, 155–156 (2023).
36. Esty, D. C. & Bell, M. L. Business leadership in global climate change responses.
Am. J. Public Health 108, https://doi.org/10.2105/ajph.2018.304336 (2018).
37. Smith, S. R. & Christie, I. Knowledge integration in the politics and policy of rapid
transitions to net zero carbon: a typology and mapping method for climate
actors in the UK. Sustainability 13, 662 (2021).
38. Cano-Marin, E., Mora-Cantallops, M. & Sánchez-Alonso, S. Twitter as a predictive
system: a systematic literature review. J. Bus. Res. 157, 113561 (2023).
39. Bollen, J., Mao, H. & Zeng, X. Twitter mood predicts the stock market. J. Comput.
Sci. 2, 1–8 (2011).
40. Oliveira, N., Cortez, P. & Areal, N. The impact of microblogging data for stock
market prediction: using Twitter to predict returns, volatility, trading volume and
survey sentiment indices. Expert Syst. Appl. 73, 125–144 (2017).
41. Kirilenko, A. P., Molodtsova, T. & Stepchenkova, S. O. People as sensors: Mass
media and local temperature inﬂuence climate change discussion on Twitter.
Glob. Environ. Chang. 30, 92–100 (2015).
42. Dellmuth, L. & Shyrokykh, K. Climate change on Twitter: implications for climate
governance research. WIREs Clim. Chang. https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.848 (2023).
43. Kenner, D. & Heede, R. White knights, or horsemen of the apocalypse? prospects
for big oil to align emissions with a 1.5c pathway. Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 79, 102049
(2021).
44. Lorenz-Spreen, P., Lewandowsky, S., Sunstein, C. R. & Hertwig, R. How behavioural
sciences can promote truth, autonomy and democratic discourse online. Nat.
Hum. Behav. 4, 1102–1109 (2020).
45. Lin, C. & He, Y. Joint sentiment/topic model for sentiment analysis. In Proc. 18th
ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management—CIKM ’09 (eds
Chueng, D., Song, I-Y., Chu, W., Hu, X. & Lin, J.) (Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, United States, 2009).
46. Lin, C., He, Y., Everson, R. & Ruger, S. Weakly supervised joint sentiment-topic
detection from text. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 24, 1134–1145 (2012).
47. Pfaff, B. Var, svar and svec models: implementation within R package vars. J. Stat.
Softw. 27, 1–32 (2008).
48. Pfaff, B. Analysis of Integrated and Cointegrated Time Series with R 2nd edn (New
York, Springer, 2008).
49. Barrie, C. & Ho, J. Academictwitter: an R package to access the Twitter academic
research product track V2 API endpoint. J. Open Source Softw. 6, 3272 (2021).
50. Taylor, M. & Watts, J. Revealed: the 20 Firms Behind a Third of All Carbon Emissions
(2019).
51. Berkeley Library, University of California. Non-governmental organizations
(NGOs). University of California Berkeley, CA, United States (2022).
52. Raviraj. Top 23 Global Nonproﬁts Protecting the Environment. Donorbox, VA, Uni-
ted States (2022).
53. Cook, D., Waugh, B., Abdipanah, M., Hashemi, O. & Rahman, S. Twitter deception
and inﬂuence: issues of identity, slacktivism, and puppetry. J. Inf. Warf. 13, 58–71
(2014).
54. Al Baghal, T., Wenz, A., Sloan, L. & Jessop, C. Linking Twitter and survey data:
asymmetry in quantity and its impact. EPJ Data Sci. 10, https://doi.org/10.1140/
epjds/s13688-021-00286-7 (2021).
55. Morstatter, F. & Liu, H. Discovering, assessing, and mitigating data bias in social
media. Online Soc. Netw. Media 1, 1–13 (2017).
56. King, G. & Hopkins, D. Extracting systematic social science meaning from text. Am.
J. Political Sci. 54, 229–247 (2010).
57. Grimmer, J. & Stewart, B. M. Text as data: the promise and pitfalls of automatic
content analysis methods for political texts. Political Anal. 21, 267–297 (2013).
58. Denny, M. J. & Spirling, A. Text preprocessing for unsupervised learning: why it
matters, when it misleads, and what to do about it. Political Anal. 26, 168–189
(2018).
59. Debnath, R. et al. Social media enables people-centric climate action in the hard-
to-decarbonise building sector. Sci. Rep. 12, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-
23624-9 (2022).
60. Grefenstette, G. Tokenization. In Ide, N., Véronis, J. & van Halteren, H. (eds) Syn-
tactic Wordclass Tagging Vol. 9, Text, Speech and Language Technology 117–133
(Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, 1999).
61. Manning, C. D., Raghavan, P. & Schutze, H. Introduction to Information Retrieval
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2008).
62. Rinker, T. & Spinu, V. Trinker/sentimentr: Version 0.4.0 (2016). CRAN
63. Yu, H., Shang, J., Hsu, M., Castellanos M. & Han, J. Data-driven contextual
valence shifter quantiﬁcation for multi-theme sentiment analysis. In Proc. 25th
ACM International Conference on Information Knowledge Management (eds
Mukhopadhyay S, & Zhai, C.) (Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, United States, 2016).
64. Barbera, P. et al. Who leads? Who follows? Measuring issue attention and agenda
setting by legislators and the mass public using social media data. Am. Political
Sci. Rev. 113, 883–901 (2019).
65. Wallis, K. F. Time series analysis of bounded economic variables. J. Time Ser. Anal.
8, 115–123 (1987).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Michael Ewens for his help accessing the CRSP data we use in this paper.
RD’s work is supported by the Quadrature Climate Foundation, 2023 Google Cloud
Climate Innovation program and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation [OPP1144]. KM,
TR, and RD acknowledges support from the Cambridge Judge Business School Small
Grant Scheme [SG20-09] and Cambridge Faculty of Economics Keynes Fund [JHVH].
RMA and DE’s work is supported by Caltech’s Resnick Sustainability Institute (DE’s
R. Debnath et al.
11
npj Climate Action (2023)  47 


work was supported by the Caltech Resnick Sustainability Institute while he was a
PhD candidate at Caltech). RD is grateful to Professor Flora Samuel, Stan Finney and
Zara Kuckelhaus for supporting with computing infrastructure.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
R.D.: Conceptualization, methodology, investigation, data curation, writing—original
draft, writing—review & editing, project administration, funding acquisition, super-
vision. D.E.: Conceptualization, methodology, investigation, formal analysis, data
curation, writing—original draft, writing—review & editing, project administration,
visualization. K.M.: Conceptualization, funding acquisition. T.R.: Conceptualization,
writing—review & editing, funding acquisition. R.M.A.: Conceptualization, methodol-
ogy,
investigation,
writing
original
draft,
writing—review
&
editing,
project
administration, funding acquisition, supervision.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s44168-023-00086-x.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Ramit Debnath.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from
the
copyright
holder.
To
view
a
copy
of
this
license,
visit
http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2023
R. Debnath et al.
12
npj Climate Action (2023)  47 
