Jaspal, R., Turner, A., & Nerlich, B. (2014). Fracking on YouTube:
Exploring Risks, Benefits and Human Values. Environmental Values,
23(5), 501-527. https://doi.org/10.3197/096327114X13947900181473
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
License (if available):
CC BY
Link to published version (if available):
10.3197/096327114X13947900181473
Link to publication record on the Bristol Research Portal
PDF-document
University of Bristol – Bristol Research Portal
General rights
This document is made available in accordance with publisher policies. Please cite only the
published version using the reference above. Full terms of use are available:
http://www.bristol.ac.uk/red/research-policy/pure/user-guides/brp-terms/


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
Environmental Values 23 (2014): 501–527. doi: 10.3197/096327114X13947900181473
 OPEN ACCESS (Creative Commons CC-BY 4.0 License). 
Submitted 12 February 2013; accepted 17 June 2013
Fracking on YouTube:  
Exploring Risks, Benefits and Human Values
RUSI JASPAL
Self and Identity Research Group 
Faculty of Health and Life Sciences
De Montfort University
Leicester, LE1 9BH, UK
Email: rusi.jaspal@cantab.net
ANDREW TURNER
D2K Research Group, School of Social and Community Medicine
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
University of Bristol
Bristol BS8 2BN, UK 
Email: andrew.turner@bristol.ac.uk
BRIGITTE NERLICH
Institute for Science and Society
School of Sociology and Social Policy
University of Nottingham
University Park, Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK
Email: brigitte.nerlich@nottingham.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
Fracking or the extraction of shale gas through hydraulic fracturing of rock 
has become a contested topic, especially in the United States, where it has 
been deployed on a large scale, and in Europe where it is still largely specu-
lative. Research is beginning to investigate the environmental and economic 
costs and benefits as well as public perceptions of this new energy technol-
ogy. However, so far the social and psychological impact of fracking on those 
involved in it, such as gas workers, or those living in the vicinity of fracking 
sites, has escaped the attention of the social science research community. In 
this article we begin to fill this gap through a small-scale thematic analysis 
of representations of fracking in fifty YouTube videos, where the trailer of a 
controversial film, Gasland (Fox, 2010), has had a marked impact. Results 
show that the videos discuss not only environmental and economic costs and 


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
RUSI JASPAL, ANDREW TURNER and BRIGITTE NERLICH 
502
Environmental Values 23.5
benefits of fracking but also social and psychological impacts on individuals 
and communities. These videos reveal a human face of fracking that remains 
all too often hidden from view. 
KEYWORDS
Fracking, environmental values, human values, social and psychological im-
pacts, identity
INTRODUCTION
Some of the most pressing problems facing governments all over the world 
include climate change and resource depletion, in particular of fresh water, soil 
and, of course, fossil fuels. This has led to efforts to reduce CO2 emissions, on 
the one hand, in order to mitigate the effects of global warming, and, on the 
other, to search for novel sources of fossil fuels. 
One of these novel sources of fossil fuel is shale gas, which is extracted 
from the earth by hydraulic fracturing or ‘fracking’ involving the use of water, 
sand and chemicals. Induced hydraulic fracturing is the process whereby high-
pressure water with additives is used to increase fissures in the shale rock layer 
and thereby extract natural gas embedded within the layer (for a more detailed 
description, see The Royal Society and The Royal Academy of Engineering, 
2012). Shale gas is a natural gas and therefore often claimed to have a lower 
carbon footprint compared to traditional fossil fuels (Engelder, 2011). As a 
result, it is sometimes positioned as a clean(er) or ‘transitional’ energy source 
and argued to contribute to climate change mitigation. However, debates are 
emerging about the threat posed by fracking to water resources (Finewood 
and Stroup, 2012), about large-scale methane leakage (Slezak, 2012) and also 
about fracking as a distraction from efforts to reduce the use of fossil fuels 
and from investing in alternative energy sources. Despite this, fracking has 
become a boom industry in the United States. In the UK, fracking has been 
attempted on a small scale but came to a halt after it was linked to some small 
earthquakes (Jaspal and Nerlich, 2014a). It is now back on the agenda after the 
government lifted a moratorium in December 2012. 
Fracking has as yet not been studied in detail by social scientists, ethicists 
and experts in science and technology studies. There has been some recent 
work on the politics and regulation of fracking, particularly in the US (Forbis 
and Kear, 2011; Mooney, 2011; Negro, 2012). However, this has not yet been 
matched by detailed research into public perceptions of fracking and in par-
ticular the social and psychological dimensions of fracking. The present article 
begins to address this gap in research by examining (i) portrayals of the risks 


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
FRACKING ON YOUTUBE
503
Environmental Values 23.5
and benefits of fracking, with particular attention to the human dimension of 
fracking; and (ii) how fracking might affect environmental values and, con-
sequently, the identities of individuals and communities directly involved in 
fracking, as reflected in a small number of YouTube videos on fracking. 
Given the importance of social media in the debate on environmental issues 
(Jaspal, Nerlich and Koteyko, 2013; Porter and Hellsten, in press), this article 
examines the role of high-impact YouTube videos in constructing narratives of 
fracking, both in terms of risks and benefits and implications for environmen-
tal values and identity, which could in turn shape public understanding of the 
technology.
THE HUMAN DIMENSION OF FRACKING
Some research into the human dimension of fracking is emerging in the UK 
and the US. One research project at the University of Durham1 has studied the 
perceived impacts of fracking across Europe and found that concerns were 
very much shared across countries, in particular around issues of water con-
tamination, seismicity, waste water and water usage, subsidence, long-term 
fate of fracking fluid, changes in subsurface pressure regime, impact on land-
scape and fugitive emissions. The focus here seems to have been on exploring 
economic and environmental values. In particular, there is an argument that in-
trinsic environmental values (surrounding water, landscape etc) are potentially 
threatened by the practice of fracking (Callicott, 1986; Elliot, 1992).
A different focus can be found in a study of public attitudes carried out by 
Nick Pidgeon at the University of Cardiff. His research, which used delibera-
tive workshops, found that people tend not to view fracking as a solution to 
either the energy crisis or climate change. Pidgeon stresses that ‘[o]nly fo-
cusing on the engineering concepts of risk – probabilities, damage estimates 
etc – is unlikely to meet people’s actual concerns about fracking’ and that ‘[r]
isk communication must aim for a genuine dialogue with the affected public, 
and one that aims to build trust through exploring people’s different values, 
and meeting their concerns about uncertainty or governance arrangements’. 
(ESRC, 2012) Here the issue of values emerges in the context of a public dia-
logue about fracking.
A survey-based report into public perceptions of fracking in the UK was 
carried out at the University of Nottingham in 2012 (O’Hara et al., 2012) and is 
repeated every six months. It found in 2012 that, in the UK, public opinion on 
the question is as yet unformed or highly uncertain and that ‘overall, shale gas 
appears to be a fuel source over which the public has yet to make up its mind’ 
(O’Hara et al., 2012: 10). Attitudes seem to be shifting towards more accept-
ance in 2013 (O’Hara et al., 2013).
1.	
https://www.dur.ac.uk/refine/


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
RUSI JASPAL, ANDREW TURNER and BRIGITTE NERLICH 
504
Environmental Values 23.5
O’Hara et al. (2012) show that most of the British people surveyed in their 
research mention television news (and other audiovisual sources) as primary 
sources of information concerning fracking (and therefore as a way to ‘make 
up their minds’). However, for those seeking additional information independ-
ent of any viewing schedule, YouTube videos may also be of importance, 
especially since a documentary film made in the United States, Gasland, be-
came a focus for debate after 2010 and was also discussed in the traditional 
press (Jaspal and Nerlich, 2014b).
Gasland was mentioned 171 times in UK newspapers between 1 January 
2010 and 31 December 2011, and, out of 94 BBC news items, five mentioned 
Gasland. Similarly, it has been argued that YouTube (and the comments that 
YouTube generates) constitutes an important social context for understand-
ing public understandings of climate change and its mitigation technologies 
(Porter and Hellsten, in press). Moreover, in the medical literature the content 
of YouTube videos has been used as a data source for understandings of, for ex-
ample, vaccination (Keelan et al., 2007), tobacco use (Freeman and Chapman, 
2007) and bird flu (Pandey et al., 2010).
When surveying YouTube videos on fracking we noted that many were pro-
duced in the US and dealt not only with general risks and benefits of fracking 
but also, and even more, with the social and psychological impact on fracking 
in a country where the practice is already a reality. In general, the videos make 
reference to intrinsic environmental values and in particular the notion that 
environmental phenomena (e.g. landscape, water, nature) should be valued by 
virtue of their very essence (Callicott, 1986; Elliot, 1992). Therefore, in this 
article, we focus largely upon intrinsic, rather than extrinsic, environmental 
values. We regarded the YouTube videos not only as a source for studying 
how public perceptions may be shaped by them, but also, and even more, as 
a resource for studying how human, cultural and environmental values are 
discussed – that is to say, how what one may call the human face of fracking 
is expressed in these short films. This became the focus of the present article. 
Such social and psychological impacts, especially social and community 
health risks of fracking are still rarely discussed by social scientists, but things 
seem to be gradually changing. For instance, Finewood and Stroup (2012) 
have examined the impact of fracking for water sources in Pennsylvania from 
the perspective of environmental values. The authors argue that ‘neoliberal 
pro-fracking arguments are (re)defining the relationship among people, the 
environment, and institutions, which in turn normalizes the impacts on com-
munities and the resources on which they depend’ (p. 72). The authors also 
‘suggest that an analysis of fracking should include an investigation into the 
neoliberal-politicized strategies that various stakeholders and production firms 
use to define environmental resources, and the ways these efforts often ben-
efit some, despite deleterious impacts on others and the places they live’ (p. 
74). This clearly highlights the need for researchers to examine the role of 


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
FRACKING ON YOUTUBE
505
Environmental Values 23.5
environmental and human values in the debate about fracking in order to pro-
vide a more holistic account of the social and psychological implications of 
the practice.
In this paper we focus on narratives of risk and benefit communicated in 
YouTube videos which also focus on fracking’s deleterious impacts on selves 
and others and the places they live in – that is, its impacts on values attached 
to places, communities and the individuals who inhabit them. This is consist-
ent with research into place attachment and place identity in the context of 
novel energy sources and NIMBYism (Devine-Wright, 2009; Devine-Wright 
and Howes, 2010). 
As the most viewed YouTube clip on fracking in November 2012 (when 
we carried out our study) was a Gasland trailer, we begin by providing some 
information about this important film. We then go on to describe the theoretical 
and methodological aspects of our study, followed by the results of our analy-
sis. It should be stressed, however, that this is a small-scale and opportunistic 
study, which is intended to initiate further research and debate on the role of 
environmental and human values in fracking, as well as more detailed research 
into its social and psychological impacts.
GASLAND: A SOCIAL ‘GAME-CHANGER’
In media reporting, fracking is frequently referred to as a ‘game changer’ 
with regard to energy supply issues and climate change (Jaspal and Nerlich, 
2014b). The documentary film Gasland can be regarded as a ‘game changer’ 
when it comes to public debates about fracking. Gasland was produced in 
2010 by Josh Fox and has become a major resource in the mobilisation against 
fracking (being followed more recently by the film Promised Land [van Sant, 
2012]). Gasland focused quite explicitly on threats allegedly posed by frack-
ing to intrinsic environmental values when it depicted the contamination of 
air, water and landscape. It was nominated in 2011 for an Academy Award for 
Best Documentary. This is how the film is described on its promotion website:2
About the film
The largest domestic natural gas drilling boom in history has swept across the 
United States. The Halliburton-developed drilling technology of ‘fracking’ or 
hydraulic fracturing has unlocked a ‘Saudi Arabia of natural gas’ just beneath 
us. But is fracking safe? When filmmaker Josh Fox is asked to lease his land for 
drilling, he embarks on a cross-country odyssey uncovering a trail of secrets, 
lies and contamination. A recently drilled nearby Pennsylvania town reports 
that residents are able to light their drinking water on fire. This is just one of the 
many absurd and astonishing revelations of a new country called GASLAND. 
2.	
http://www.gaslandthemovie.com/


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
RUSI JASPAL, ANDREW TURNER and BRIGITTE NERLICH 
506
Environmental Values 23.5
Part verité travelogue, part expose, part mystery, part bluegrass banjo melt-
down, part showdown.
Gasland had an impact on search patterns for fracking in the United States, as 
the following data from Google Insights for search show (see Figure 1). The 
film seems to have to have contributed to a debate about fracking.
Figure 1. Google Insights, interest in the term ‘Gasland’ (grey) and ‘fracking’ (black) 
in the US since 2005.
By the end of 2012, a trailer of Gasland on YouTube had attracted over 2 mil-
lion views. However, this is not the only information that those searching for 
information on fracking can find on YouTube. There are many more videos out 
there that convey various messages about fracking, from a variety of perspec-
tives and positions. 
METHOD
In order to study the range of representations and arguments around fracking 
that can be found on YouTube, this study selected fifty YouTube videos and 
analysed them using qualitative thematic analysis and Identity Process Theory. 
The fifty videos available on YouTube are a heterogeneous collection of 
videos about fracking that differ considerably in format and provenance. The 
sample included news-reports, documentaries, home-made videos and mar-
keting material. The videos analysed share high popularity (in terms of view 
counts) on YouTube. The heterogeneity of the videos is an advantage for our 
analysis because it provides a rich source of data that illustrates the multiple 
and complex ways that environmental values, risk and benefits can interact and 
in turn be configured by different actors in the debate about fracking. Despite 


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
FRACKING ON YOUTUBE
507
Environmental Values 23.5
this heterogeneity, the videos all spoke to important debates about fracking and 
many included clips telling personal or what one might call ‘human interest’ 
stories.
It is noteworthy that the videos are mainly of US origin (the list of fifty 
includes three non-English-language videos; of those in English one is about 
Poland and the rest are all about US), but given YouTube’s contribution to ‘cul-
tural globalization’ and international participatory culture (Lashley, 2012), it is 
likely that many of the representations observable in the US will be communi-
cated to other parts of the world and set the agenda for public understanding.
THEORY AND ANALYTICAL APPROACH
Identity Process Theory provides an integrative and holistic model of the self 
and integrates distinct epistemological positions. In this article we attempt to 
apply aspects of the theory to the study of environmental and human values 
(Breakwell, 2010a), especially of the impact of fracking on the understanding 
of self, others and values attached to places and communities. Identity Process 
Theory (Breakwell, 1986, 2010b) argues that groups and individuals strive to 
maintain feelings of (1) continuity, (2) self-esteem, (3) self-efficacy and (4) 
distinctiveness. Moreover, introducing a fifth principle, Jaspal and Cinnirella 
(2010) argue that coherence between identity elements is important. These 
principles may be regarded as cultural values in that they specify what is cul-
turally desirable for identity, at both the individual and group levels (Lyons, 
1996). These principles are likely to be culturally and temporally specific 
(Breakwell, 2010b). Thus, while human values are relatively stable, overarch-
ing goals in people’s lives (Schwartz, 1992), identity principles are culturally 
desirable end-states for identity. According to the theory, inappropriate levels 
of these ‘identity principles’ can result in identity threat. Identity threat, in turn, 
can result in a number of ‘coping strategies’, which often include deflection 
strategies and even political paralysis (Nerlich, 2010). 
In this article, we do not focus on the psychological aspects of identity 
processes. Rather, we examine the constructed social, economic and environ-
mental risks and benefits of fracking and the constructed outcomes for identity 
as specified in Identity Process Theory. Crucially, these constructed risks and 
benefits may affect the identity principles in a variety of different ways. For 
instance, a technology that may conceivably pose a ‘risk’ to the environment 
may, conversely, bolster national self-efficacy by providing greater economic 
competence and control, while a constructed ‘benefit’ in terms of employment 
could, nonetheless, be construed as a threat to continuity due to the scale of 
social change (Jaspal, Nerlich and Cinnirella, 2014). Consequently, it is neces-
sary to tease out the diverse human identity implications that the constructed 
risks and benefits of fracking can have. Identity Process Theory provides scope 


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
RUSI JASPAL, ANDREW TURNER and BRIGITTE NERLICH 
508
Environmental Values 23.5
for integrating analyses of intrinsic environmental values and cultural values 
(e.g. continuity, distinctiveness and so on).
Recently, social psychologists (Coyle and Murtagh, 2014; Dixon et al., 
2014) have made a convincing case for examining discursive constructions of 
identity threat – that is, how particular events and phenomena are represented 
as affecting continuity, self-efficacy and so on. This is important because con-
structions of identity threat may become reified in public understanding of 
controversial technologies and can provide a persistent lens for viewing and 
construing the potential implications of adopting them (Devine-Wright, 2009). 
As a social constructivist theory (Jaspal, 2014), Identity Process Theory can be 
fruitfully applied to studies in psychology and the humanities. Accordingly, in 
this paper, we invoke tenets of the theory, as a heuristic lens, in order to under-
stand the negative and positive portrayals of fracking and how they are used in 
order to construct particular social and psychological outcomes.
Thematic analysis has been described as ‘a method for identifying, analys-
ing and reporting patterns (themes) within data’ (Braun and Clarke, 2006: 78). 
Here the method is employed in order to identify key themes and arguments 
used in our corpus of fifty YouTube videos. Our aim in this paper is to provide 
a rich thematic description of this relatively small corpus of videos, which 
is particularly useful given the dearth of research into the use of videos in 
the context of climate change communication (but see Porter and Hellsten, in 
press). Our approach is based on variants of thematic analysis that have been 
employed to examine both textual and visual data (Nerlich and Jaspal, 2013). 
We focus primarily upon the verbal accounts offered in the YouTube videos 
but also examine their audiovisual elements in order to establish their tone, for 
instance. This research suggests that thematic analysis can be used as an induc-
tive approach whereby the themes are closely linked to the data themselves, 
and thus data-driven, rather than interpreted through the lens of any pre-exist-
ing theory (cf. Jaspal and Nerlich, 2014a).
A key advantage of using thematic analysis lies in its ability to integrate the 
micro and macro levels of analysis. Indeed, our analysis ‘goes beyond the se-
mantic content of the data [that is, the micro level], and starts to identify ... the 
underlying ideas, assumptions and conceptualizations – and ideologies – [that 
is, the macro level] that are theorized as shaping or informing the semantic 
content of the data’ (Braun and Clarke, 2006: 84). Accordingly, we identify 
how particular micro-level constructions resonate with macro-level represen-
tations which circulate in social discourse. For instance, the micro-level use 
of negative metaphors in describing the impact of fracking for the landscape 
was mapped onto the cultural value of continuity (a macro-level phenomenon), 
in order to discern potential relationships between micro-level language and 
macro-level cultural values. It is widely acknowledged that the interpretative 
framework of the analyst is key in qualitative thematic analysis, which has led 
to criticisms of excessive subjectivity in qualitative research and to debates 


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
FRACKING ON YOUTUBE
509
Environmental Values 23.5
about quality control in the qualitative paradigm (Stiles, 1999). In order to 
address this limitation, the authors discussed potentially idiosyncratic interpre-
tations of the data until consensus was reached.
PROCEDURE
YouTube was searched using the terms ‘fracking shale gas’, which returned 
over 1,000 results. The Uniform Resource Locators (URLs) of the fifty most 
viewed videos on YouTube were recorded, and then the videos were profiled 
(excluding duplicates and non-English language videos, this yielded 43 vid-
eos). All URLs were recorded at a single point in time, as it was found that 
search results on YouTube were unstable and often changed (though it is un-
clear precisely what range of physical and virtual factors contributed to this 
instability). Initially we tabulated the videos by the number of views they 
attracted, summarised their content and noted the positive or negative tone 
adopted in the video, as the screenshot of our excel spread sheet in Figure 2 
shows. 
The descriptive summaries were then used for a three-step thematic analy-
sis, consisting of initial rough coding, including the tone of the videos, sorting 
and focusing in on thematic clusters for more in-depth analysis.
Coding, sorting and tracking thematic clusters
As one can see from the reproduction of our spreadsheet (Figure 2), a large 
number of views does not necessarily translate into a large number of com-
ments. Unsurprisingly, the Gasland trailer (yt-01) was the most viewed 
YouTube video and attracted the most comments (see Figure 3). The next most 
commented-on video we could find (where comments were not disabled) was 
entitled ‘Fracking Hell: The Untold Story’ (yt-04), which is also featured on 
the web-site of the UK anti-fracking movement ‘Frack-off’, or the Extreme 
Energy Action Network.3
Video
No. Comments
yt-01
2,738
yt-04
1,695
yt-02
594
yt-16
589
yt-22
444
Figure 3. Number of comments on the YouTube Videos selected for this study.
3.	
http://frack-off.org.uk/fracking-hell/watch-the-film/


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
RUSI JASPAL, ANDREW TURNER and BRIGITTE NERLICH 
510
Environmental Values 23.5
Off-shoots of the Gasland film included video clips entitled ‘Can you do that 
with your tapwater?’ (yt-02), ‘Factory farming, fracking and 49ers’ (yt-16) and 
‘The truth about fracking’ (yt-22).
Compared to many other YouTube videos, some of which attract millions 
of views, the numbers of views for fracking videos are actually quite small. 
The viewing figures are, however, similar to those for other contested climate 
change mitigation technologies, for example, such as carbon capture and stor-
age and geoengineering.
Within the 43 videos, five general styles were evident: (1) News-report, 
(2) Magazine or Documentary, (3) water-tap gas ignition, (4) Gas company 
marketing, (5) Other unique or unusual videos. 
Table 1. Overview of type, frequency and tone of YouTube videos selected for this 
study.
Type
Frequency
Tone
News-report
5
Mixed/neutral
Magazine/Documentary
9
Mostly negative
Water-tap gas ignition
6
Negative/sensational
Gas company marketing
12
Wholly positive
Others
11
Mostly negative
Figure 2A. Illustration of coding procedure.


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
FRACKING ON YOUTUBE
511
Environmental Values 23.5
The top four most commented-on videos were all negative in tone, high-
lighting environmental risks and or human costs over economic benefits. 
Equivalently, all videos with over 500 comments are negative. The large ma-
jority of positive videos, which focused on economic benefits, are marketing 
videos of gas companies, whereas the negative videos come from a wider 
range of sources. 
A rough coding for major themes was carried out first, based on the de-
scription of the videos on the excel spreadsheet. The resulting list of themes 
was discussed by the three co-authors and then sorted into two major thematic 
clusters around videos that were in favour of fracking and those opposed to 
fracking. It should be stressed that the numbers next to the themes indicate 
how often a theme was discussed in the videos, not the number of videos that 
we found for each theme. The final thematic categorisation is as follows:
Videos highlighting benefits and opportunities
(1) FRACKING BOOSTS THE ECONOMY
Fracking jobs give people opportunity to realise ‘American dream’ (2)
Gas Companies concerned about regulation stifling growth (1)
Figure 2B. Illustration of coding procedure.


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
RUSI JASPAL, ANDREW TURNER and BRIGITTE NERLICH 
512
Environmental Values 23.5
(2) FRACKING IS SAFE
Multiple layers of casing on the well-bore prevents ground pollution (8)
Fracking is too deep in the ground for chemicals to pollute groundwater (4)
Problems that have been reported are not problems with fracking per se (1)
Fracking does not pollute the surrounding air/environment (1) 
There are no examples of groundwater pollution from fracking  
chemicals (1)
(3) FRACKING DOES NOT HARM THE ENVIRONMENT OR 
COMMUNITIES
Fracking has less impact on the environment than conventional drilling (5) 
Gas companies are socially and environmentally responsible (4) 
Pro-fracking geologist self-describes as an environmentalist (1)
Residents near drilling sites are well-looked after by gas companies (1)
Videos highlighting risks and costs
(1) HUMAN COSTS
Social cost of fracking work is tragic (5) 
Fracking causes the industrialisation of small towns [bad] (5) 
Housing gas industry workers is an industry in itself (5) 
(2) ENVIRONMENTAL COSTS
Environmental cost of fracking is tragic (2) 
Fracking pollutes the surrounding air/environment (6)
Fracking contaminates groundwater ((4) 
Natural gas not a cleaner replacement for oil (1) 
Fracking puts added pressure on water resources (1) 
(3) CONCERN ABOUT CHEMICALS
Fracking involves dangerous chemicals (3)
Farmers near fracking sites, concern about chemicals (3) 
Economic benefits are spurious because of health and environmental  
costs (1)
Experts expressing concern (radiation, contamination etc.) (8)
Concern about volume of chemicals (2)
Personal accounts of consequences of chemical spills (3) 
Fracking chemicals are proprietary (3)
(4) RISK AND REGULATION 
Current regulation is insufficient (12)


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
FRACKING ON YOUTUBE
513
Environmental Values 23.5
ANALYSIS
The analysis focuses on two sides of a debate that is emerging about fracking, 
with one side highlighting environmental risks and the other economic benefits 
(Briggle, 2013). Moreover, drawing on Identity Process Theory, we outline 
the constructed implications of fracking for identity and social and environ-
mental values (e.g. threat constructions). More specifically, we show how the 
YouTube videos construct identity threat and/or identity enhancement (from 
an Identity Process Theory perspective) resulting from the implementation of 
fracking, in order to render the practice socially and psychologically tangible 
for audiences. 
As we shall see, the videos go beyond a binary divide of economic ben-
efits versus environmental costs, especially when they discuss the local, social 
and personal costs of fracking and its implications for traditional ways of life 
and values. As Finewood and Stroup (2012: 76) have pointed out, ‘[d]espite 
the fact that industrial natural gas development is initiated at the national and 
global scales, land use decision-making and impacts are felt at the local scale 
where rural stakeholders (who often utilize diverse, resource-based livelihood 
strategies) must compete for the same land and water resources as fossil fuel 
developers’. 
In the following we shall first provide an analysis of discussions of environ-
mental, social and psychological costs as portrayed in videos with a negative 
tone and then proceed to analyse those videos with a positive tone focusing on 
economic benefits.
Threats to environmental values
One of the key sets of arguments is based on the claim that fracking poses 
unacceptable threats to the environment and to intrinsic environmental values 
such as the safety and availability of clean air, soil and water. This includes 
arguments about pollution or contamination below ground, on the surface and 
in the air – all, it is claimed, caused by fracking operations. As well as these 
contamination arguments, there are arguments about the destruction of natural 
beauty, as well as the pressure that fracking operations put on the environ-
ment, in terms of the demand for water. This also ties in closely with a further 
set of arguments about the safety and risks of fracking – the connection being 
that one of the reasons given for why fracking is unsafe or risky is precisely 
that the (environmental) costs of accidents is high (of course, there are also 
independent arguments about costs in terms of health, or that ‘chemicals are 
bad’). Threats to such intrinsic environmental values in turn symbolise po-
tential threats to the continuity principle of identity, given that phenomena 
(air, earth and water) which are pervasively valued for their very essence are 


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
RUSI JASPAL, ANDREW TURNER and BRIGITTE NERLICH 
514
Environmental Values 23.5
represented as being susceptible to negative change. Such negative change is 
attributed to pollution.
Overall, these arguments are anchored in an image of destruction, de-
pletion, pollution and contamination affecting the most common natural 
‘elements’ that surround people, namely: air, earth and water (Jaspal and 
Nerlich, 2014a). Tied to this is the image of water catching fire, thus linking 
the anti-fracking arguments also in the fourth of the classical elements known 
since antiquity, namely fire. Fracking, as portrayed in the negative/sensational-
ist videos, not only pollutes, contaminates or destroys those elements that are 
purported to support human life, but is also portrayed as doing so violently, 
through drilling, fracturing and so on. This, then, seems to be a direct attack on 
core environmental values attached to land, soil, water and so on. Such images 
portray fracking as inherently dangerous to the earth surface and subsurface 
but also to those who live on it. Tying anti-fracking messages to dominant 
social constructions of fire, earth, air and water may enable such messages to 
spread more easily and to frame public perceptions. In short, these messages 
and framings serve to replace existing, long-standing ways of thinking about 
intrinsic environmental values with alternative, threatening ways of thinking 
– the negativity of such messages and framings constructs a potential threat to 
the continuity principle of identity. The following themes deal with these types 
of messages and framings.
Fracking contaminates groundwater and surrounding land
Videos generally note two ways in which groundwater can be contaminated: 
by methane, released by fracking; or by the chemicals used in the fracking 
process. Methane contamination of water is often illustrated dramatically, by 
igniting the gas collected from kitchen taps, a much contested but essential part 
of the movie Gasland. One video advises people not to drink their tap water 
if they live near fracking sites (yt-44). Other videos note that, geologically, 
fracking is ‘highly damaging to rocks and aquifers, although mining compa-
nies defend the process as ecologically sound’ (yt-27). However, surrounding 
land is typically thought to be at most risk of contamination by chemical spills 
or accidents.
There are multiple routes by which contamination is said to occur. One 
video lists the following possibilities: ‘surface spills, blowouts, poor cement-
ing jobs, and communication to water zones’ (yt-31). Storage pits, used to store 
some of the fracking fluid once it is removed from the wells, are claimed to be 
‘poorly constructed’ and ‘prone to leaks’ (yt-27), another video notes that sites 
are placed very close to rivers (yt-04 and yt-46). In one documentary video, an 
interviewee claims that ‘the groundwater is contaminated from the production, 
from the drilling from the old pits in this entire area’ (yt-23)
Fracking fluid is posing a risk of contamination, because of the amount of 
fresh water that is used and which must be disposed of: as one documentary 
video notes, ‘when the fracturing process is complete a large percentage of that 


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
FRACKING ON YOUTUBE
515
Environmental Values 23.5
fluid comes back up, so we have purposefully polluted large quantities of fresh 
water with chemicals that do not belong in the human environment’ (yt-04 and 
yt-46)4. 
Similarly, the same video (but a different interviewee) notes that the trans-
portation of these chemicals to and from fracking sites poses a risk: ‘the amount 
of fluid that’s running around out there in tanker trucks, literally thousands of 
tanker trucks is such that one tanker truck going off the road with fracking 
chemicals in it, into a river, would wipe it out’ (yt-04 and yt-46). 
The acceptable number of accidents is regarded as too large: ‘one serious 
environmental concern for every 150 wells drilled to date, you do the math, if 
we’re talking hundreds of thousands of wells, we’re doing hundreds or thou-
sands of spills’ (yt-04 and yt-46). 
Moreover, there are concerns about a radioactivity risk: ‘the level of ra-
dium in the Marcellus [shale] is about 267 times the safe amount, meaning that 
it will kill you’ (yt-04 and yt-46). The argument of radioactive contamination is 
used as a strong deterrent against the adoption of this gas extraction technology. 
Conversely, in UK media representations of fracking, the risk of radioactivity 
is closely linked to the risk of developing cancer as a result of ‘cancer-causing 
chemicals’ being released into drinking water (Jaspal and Nerlich, in press a).
Videos also include personal descriptions of chemical spills from fracking 
sites which stress the dangers of fracking to humans as well as to wildlife. An 
interview with a gas-worker, includes the following description of ‘day-to-day’ 
activities, which metaphorically highlights the damage to the environment: 
‘I’ve seen chemicals come out the side, literally out of the side, it looked like 
the mountain was bleeding’ (yt-04 and yt-46). In another interview near a 
fracking site that had an accidental chemical spill, the landowner states that 
‘it killed the pond, killed the fish, killed everything in the pond: no frogs, no 
turtles, no nothing. The drinking water in our house has high concentrations of 
lead.’ (yt-04 and yt-46) Here the stress is on threats (of violence) to the envi-
ronment conceptualised as a person (bleeding, killing).
An interview featuring the same person, in a different video, highlights 
a further consequence of the spill, this time focusing on real people: ‘I was 
to move up here in 09, I was gonna retire; but now my wife won’t come and 
my grandkids don’t come.’ (yt-35) Thus, fracking may pose risks, not only to 
nature, but also to ways of life. It may threaten intrinsic environmental values, 
on the one hand, and the continuity principle, on the other. There is a sys-
tematic construction of negative change to the groundwater and surrounding 
land, which are of significant personal and cultural value. Moreover, the high 
4.	
The two videos are identical in content, but were posted by two different YouTube account hold-
ers and can be found at distinct URLs: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nCyHS7fKmXI 
and https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dEB_Wwe-uBM
	
Both videos were included because they were in the top 50 most frequently viewed YouTube 
clips. Note that this is also the case for yt30 and yt48.


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
RUSI JASPAL, ANDREW TURNER and BRIGITTE NERLICH 
516
Environmental Values 23.5
number of accidents claimed to be linked to fracking alludes to a loss of con-
trol and competence which is detrimental for self-efficacy – in short, fracking 
is represented as being out of control, which in turn limits individuals’ sense 
of control.
Fracking damages the landscape
Linked to the ‘elementary’ argument that fracking destroys the earth and pol-
lutes the environment, another kind of argument found in YouTube videos 
draws on the notion that fracking operations affect and damage areas of natural 
beauty, thus posing a more tangible threat to intrinsic environmental, including 
aesthetic, values. A video about fracking in the Delaware River basin frames 
the issue of whether fracking should be permitted by first quoting sections 
from the ‘Wild and Scenic Rivers Act’ and then claiming that the Delaware 
River ‘has never been in greater danger’ (yt-40). Two other un-narrated videos 
show slides pointing out fracking sites on aerial or landscape photographs, 
again with the implicit point that the presence of these sites is a problem (yt-
45, yt-49). Again the destruction of the landscapes spills over to endangering 
traditional ways of life, thereby jeopardising the continuity principle of iden-
tity. Similarly, in a third video, a resident near a fracking site describes his 
unhappiness with the intrusion and disturbance: ‘It raises my stress level to a 
point where I don’t want to be here anymore ... it’s changing into an industrial 
zone’ (yt-35). The threat to continuity is inextricably related to place identity 
(Devine-Wright, 2009; Devine-Wright and Howes, 2010) – the individual is 
represented as being compelled to disidentify with a place that has formerly 
occupied a position of importance in the self. This is attributed to damage to 
the landscape and the alleged conversion of the place into ‘an industrial zone.’
Fracking puts added pressure on water resources
Fracking requires large quantities of water. In one news report video, the 
reporter investigates fracking operations in Texas, where there has been a 
drought (in 2011). People believe that fracking has exacerbated the drought 
problem for both farmers and homeowners: ‘It pulls the water table down, 
and with a drought, and as much water as they are using; there will be prob-
lems’ (yt-38). There was a sense in the YouTube videos that added pressure on 
water resources could result in a loss of competence and control over one’s life 
and environment, potentially jeopardising the self-efficacy principle. In short, 
fracking was said to create problems which could have irreversible effects for 
individuals and communities and which could no longer be mitigated.
Natural gas is not a cleaner replacement for oil
One environmental cost that is mentioned only once in the fifty videos is the 
role that natural gas plays in energy production. It is claimed that ‘natural gas 
burns cleaner than any other fossil fuel, but it is not cleaner in its lifecycle ... 
the lifecycle cost in terms of carbon dioxide emission and methane emission 
from the development of gas from unnatural sources like shale are at least as 


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
FRACKING ON YOUTUBE
517
Environmental Values 23.5
“dirty as coal”’ (yt-04 and yt-46). This counters widespread arguments about 
‘clean energy’ related to fracking (see Jaspal and Nerlich, 2014b). Interestingly, 
given the general negativity surrounding fracking in many of the YouTube vid-
eos, there is a tendency to safeguard continuity by counteracting potentially 
incongruent arguments concerning the ‘cleanliness’ of fracking. Thus, the con-
testation of fracking as a ‘clean energy’ may constitute a means of constructing 
continuity amid potentially incongruent arguments. Surprisingly, the issue of 
climate change is not discussed in this context. This may be explained by the 
notion that ‘[w]hen it comes to nature, human societies seem to demand not 
only objectively claimed matters of fact but also subjectively appreciated facts 
that matter’ (Jasanoff, 2010, p. 250). In short, the videos do not create much 
of a link between fracking and climate change, despite references to ‘clean’ 
energy. The anti-fracking videos also counter another, even more important, 
argument, namely that fracking brings economic benefits.
Economic benefits are spurious because of health and environmental 
costs
One of the few negative videos to explicitly acknowledge the economic benefits 
of fracking suggests that people sometimes fail to acknowledge the environ-
mental and social costs until it is too late: ‘the vast majority of people here 
think it’s wonderful. They think there will be jobs, they’ll be able to keep their 
families here, they’ll be able to pay for education ... that’s all good on paper, 
but when things happen that ruin the value of your property, ruin the health of 
your family, then that all goes out the window.’ (yt-04 and yt-46) Here we see 
the emergence of a strand of concerns regarding social and personal costs asso-
ciated with fracking, which have the power to threaten the continuity principle 
of identity, given the construction of negative change.
The environmental costs of fracking, as represented in YouTube videos, 
construct a threat to the individual and group levels of continuity. On the one 
hand, the representation of fracking as damaging for the environment and land-
scape constructs a threat to continuity at the individual level, since it entails the 
need to accept and internalise a negative social reality. Moreover, it is possible 
that the internalisation of a negative social reality could inhibit a sense of self-
esteem on the basis of place identity (Devine-Wright, 2009). In other words, 
fracking is represented as bringing about negative change to the landscape 
and to existing lifestyles which can induce a threat to (individual) continu-
ity and self-esteem. This is consistent with research into environmental threat 
and identity processes (Bonauito, Breakwell and Cano, 1998), which found 
that residents tended to perceive their local and national beaches as less pol-
luted, despite objective evidence of beach pollution in their localities. It was 
argued that the denial of pollution constituted a means of mitigating threats to 
individual continuity and self-esteem (derived from perceiving a ‘clean’ unpol-
luted beach). 


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
RUSI JASPAL, ANDREW TURNER and BRIGITTE NERLICH 
518
Environmental Values 23.5
On the other hand, fracking is represented as a real threat to humanity due 
to the alleged risk to human health (most commonly conceived in terms of 
its alleged links to an increase in cancer risk, see Steingraber et al., 2011). 
Residents’ accounts construct imagery of death and desolation which further 
reiterate the risk of harm to human beings and possibly even destruction of life 
itself. Collectively, these forms of imagery can result in a threat to the group 
level of continuity – fracking is implicitly constructed as threatening human-
ity itself. Indeed, threats to group continuity have similarly been observed in 
media representations of the impending threat of climate change (Jaspal and 
Nerlich, 2014b).
In the next section, we outline some of the social costs of fracking which 
are represented in the YouTube clips and continue to consider the threat repre-
sentations that are encouraged in them.
Threats to human values
In addition to the perceived threats posed to the environment and intrinsic en-
vironmental values, which videos with a negative view of fracking typically 
emphasise, there is another set of arguments supporting the claim that the gas 
industry imposes significant social costs in areas where fracking is imple-
mented. The problem is typically linked to the industrialisation of areas that 
previously had no heavy industry, and the negative effect this has on residents’ 
and gas company workers’ lives. The videos continue to construct threats to 
continuity, in particular.
Industrial traffic and lack of existing infrastructure
A number of videos note the effect of increased heavy truck traffic in areas 
where fracking is taking place and being developed, especially the disruption 
and inconvenience it causes to residents of towns near fracking sites. One video 
features the following comment from a resident of a (previously) small town: 
‘the days sitting out the front of the dinner having a nice conversation are long 
gone’ (yt-04 and yt-46). Another features a local woman who explains that: 
‘the truck traffic unless you experience it is beyond belief ... they speed, they 
sometimes drive down the centre lane’ (yt-35). Furthermore, one ‘protest song’ 
video emphasises the social costs of increased traffic by blaming the trucks 
for causing delays to ambulances (yt-42). The increased traffic is taken as an 
indication of a lack of sufficient infrastructure to deal with the growth of the 
fracking industry in parts of the US – for example, the transport and disposal 
of fracking chemicals. Collectively, the accounts regarding the social costs of 
fracking, which are presented in the clips, construct an undesirable change to 
individuals’ lifestyles and social surroundings. This is reflected in accounts of 
disruption and inconvenience caused to people’s lives, the sudden inability of 
residents to interact with each other as they did before and the unprecedented 
changes in their environment. Accordingly, fracking is represented as a threat 


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
FRACKING ON YOUTUBE
519
Environmental Values 23.5
to the social psychological thread connecting past, present and future – that is, 
individuals’ sense of continuity (Chandler et al., 2003). 
Fracking causes the industrialisation of small towns
More generally, the influx of people and industry to rural areas, such as North 
Dakota, is noted by a number of videos as being disruptive to local residents’ 
lives. One of the news-report videos includes an interview with a resident of a 
North Dakota town, who claims: ‘The people here would like things to calm 
down a little bit’ (yt-14). Some videos note the speed with which changes are 
happening: ‘In less than a decade the area has become rapidly industrialised, 
with over 5,000 wells drilled’ (yt-23). While others note the magnitude of the 
changes, for instance, in terms of the population increase: ‘The population of 
this North Dakota town has nearly doubled to over 20,000, people from all 
over the country are flocking to the north west corner of this state’ (yt-38). 
One news report video therefore notes that: ‘As more money and more people 
pour into the area, so do more big city problems’ (yt-38). Videos also contain 
interviews with local residents lamenting the development of the gas indus-
try: ‘It’s changing into an industrial zone’ (yt-35); and ‘our quality of life has 
deteriorated so greatly. It is the loss of our solitude.’ (yt-38) In addition, the in-
dustrialisation of towns is reported, in many of the videos, to have social costs 
through unbalancing the local economy: ‘it’s hard to make someone work for 
$40,000 or so in the city, when they can get triple that with the oil industry’ 
(yt-14).
In her critical geography research into wind development in Nevada, 
Phadke (2011) shows how the speed and scale of industrial change have af-
fected rural landscape identities. Similarly, here it appears that many of the 
YouTube clips converge in their representation of negative change to the local 
context, despite the potentially positive aspects of industrialisation such as job 
creation. In residents’ accounts there is a desire for ‘things to calm down a bit’, 
suggesting that the process of industrialisation is evaluated negatively. More 
specifically, the ‘doubling’ of the population of the North Dakota town is said 
to have induced ‘big city problems’ formerly unknown to the town and to have 
created some unbalancing of the economy. On a social level, residents lament 
the deterioration in the quality of life as a result of fracking. Consequently, 
here too there is a constructed threat to individuals’ sense of continuity over 
time due to the introduction of negative change in their lives. Yet, there is an 
implicit threat to self-efficacy in the implementation of fracking because the 
unbalancing of the economy has decreased economic competence beyond the 
control of citizens.
Impacts on individual and community health and human values
In addition to the accounts from residents presented in the clips, a further di-
mension to the social costs of fracking is the effect on the working and lifestyle 
patterns of gas-workers. Many videos claim that working in the oil fields is 


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
RUSI JASPAL, ANDREW TURNER and BRIGITTE NERLICH 
520
Environmental Values 23.5
migratory: for example, in one interview a worker states, ‘Its kinda sad, a lot 
of people come and go. Then the next day their company moves them.’ In the 
same video, the worker goes on to note, in a tragic tone, that: ‘I’m making 
more now than I would have if I had gone to college. I was going to school for 
alternative energy; and here I am in the oil field. So much for solar panels.’ (yt-
28) As well as moving a lot, the work itself is irregular. The same news-report 
interviews the owner of temporary housing for gas-workers who explains that: 
‘some guys go out at 2.30 in the morning, some guys at 10.30 in the morning, 
there’s never any normal here’ (yt-28).
Other news-report videos comment on the skewed gender balance of 
towns’ increased populations and the typical lifestyle. One notes, ‘The first 
two days we were here, and we spent a lot of time here, I didn’t see a child. I 
probably saw the male to female ratio of, like, 20 to 1.’ (yt-14); and then later, 
‘socially, there’s not a lot of socialising going on; they’re making money and 
going home’ (yt-14). Similarly a worker being interviewed in a news-report 
says, ‘the best thing about a man camp?5 I don’t know I couldn’t really tell you. 
I can tell you the worst thing, it’s a man camp and not a woman camp.’ (yt-28) 
The accounts presented in the clips suggest that fracking introduces in-
consistency in the lives of gas workers, impeding any sense of routine. The 
accounts construct an obstacle to identity coherence, which is threatening for 
identity (Jaspal and Cinnirella, 2010). However, like the other social costs of 
fracking, the absence of socialising, something that the gas workers clearly 
value, constitutes an example of negative change in their lives. This is also the 
case for those gas workers who lament the absence of women in their social 
context. These forms of negative change reflect a threat to individuals’ sense 
of continuity.
Housing gas-workers
In many of the news-report videos, a prominent aspect of how gas-workers’ 
lives are affected relates to housing. A number of videos explain that in areas 
where fracking is taking place, there are not enough houses for the influx of 
workers, ‘the irony of the Bakken [shale field] is that you can find a job but you 
can’t find a place to live’ (yt-14). As a consequence, oil companies have provi-
sioned their own housing, a phenomenon that the news-report videos take an 
interest in: ‘oil companies have built temporary housing, thousands of workers 
live in so called man camps’ (yt-38) and, ‘essentially what a man camp is a 
hotel all on one floor. What you’re having is bringing a small little city some-
where. Most of the man camps are always located in rural settings.’ (yt-28) 
More tragically, there are also interviews with gas-workers who are living in 
cars: ‘I’ve got my bed in my truck, that’s basically what it boils down to; all 
for a job’ (yt-14). It is easy to see how the self-esteem and continuity principles 
5.	
A ‘man camp’ is a cluster of communal trailers in an industrial area that accommodates the 
predominantly male workers. Man camps have become particularly prevalent in fracking 
sites.


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
FRACKING ON YOUTUBE
521
Environmental Values 23.5
may be susceptible to threat in such living conditions – individuals are repre-
sented as being unable to derive a positive self-conception on the basis of their 
living conditions and change is constructed as being negative.
Compared to videos exploring in detail the environmental and social and 
personal impacts of fracking, those touting its economic benefits are rare.
Economic values 
Videos which are positive about fracking frequently mention the economic 
value that the fracking industry brings to individuals and communities. Equally, 
many of the news-report videos highlight the positive economic benefits of the 
fracking industry. Claims about economic benefits are more consistent than 
claims about environmental and social costs: the fracking industry creates jobs 
and boosts local economies. Unlike the previous claims about environmental 
and social costs, which were anchored in folk knowledge of ‘elements’ and 
fears about contamination, pollution and destruction, these arguments are an-
chored in hopes and fears about money.
Fracking boosts the economy
The boost to local economies is noted as being largely due to the influx of people 
and industry into previously small or rural towns. For example, one news-
report video notes that the industry has ‘transformed the economic landscape: 
truck traffic, everywhere; construction, everywhere; people, yep, everywhere’ 
and goes on to note that, ‘the trickle down to the local economy has been dra-
matic ... before the boom this undeveloped land outside of Williston was worth 
$15,000, it recently sold for $200,000’ (yt-14). The explanatory ‘marketing’ 
videos, in addition to describing what fracking involves, often touch on its 
benefits, too – ‘it will also create jobs, stimulate the economy’ (yt-26) – or, if 
they feature statements from gas-workers or spokespeople, include comments 
such as ‘all the activity, all the jobs out here, wouldn’t exist if we couldn’t 
hydraulically fracture these wells’ (yt-29). 
Fracking creates jobs
Another news-report makes the observation that ‘North Dakota boasts the 
lowest unemployment rate in the country’ (yt-38), while others also feature 
interviews with gas-workers, who hold the view that ‘back home there’s no 
jobs, you come down here and there’s jobs everywhere’ (yt-28). Notably, one 
video features an interview with a truck driver, who has benefited from the 
fracking industry: ‘we didn’t have to file for bankruptcy, you know, this is the 
American way. If you can still put your boots on you go to work, and you do 
it’ and later ‘its people on the ground that made this country great; and North 
Dakota is full of them’ (yt-11). 
These clips construct fracking as bolstering identity, primarily through its 
constructed benefits for the self-efficacy principle of identity. Self-efficacy 


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
RUSI JASPAL, ANDREW TURNER and BRIGITTE NERLICH 
522
Environmental Values 23.5
reflects one’s ‘beliefs in one’s capabilities to organize and execute the course 
of action required to produce given attainments’ (Bandura, 1997: 3). By repre-
senting fracking as being conducive to economic prosperity and job creation, 
the clips also construct implementation of the technology as conducive to 
feelings of competence and control over one’s life – it is represented as em-
powering people to attain their goals and ultimately to lead better lives. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Much research on fracking focuses on the economic and environmental risks 
and benefits of this new technology, such as ‘water contamination, seismicity, 
waste, water and water usage, subsidence, long term fate of fracking fluid, 
changes in subsurface pressure regime, impact on landscape, fugitive emis-
sions’6 (Howarth and Ingraffea, 2011). Similarly, the anti-fracking movement 
tends to emphasise these concerns and to use them as a basis for denigrating 
fracking (see Jaspal and Nerlich, 2014b). The YouTube videos studied here 
certainly tackle these issues too, but their principal focus lies on the social, 
personal and psychological concerns raised by fracking, especially threats to 
intrinsic environmental values and to social and individual identity in terms 
of identity continuity, self-efficacy and other principles. While the pro- and 
the anti-fracking lobbies position themselves as speaking for ‘the people on 
the ground’, their positions tend to focus on the economic and environmental 
dimensions of fracking. 
By contrast, the YouTube videos provide novel insight into the social and 
psychological dimensions of fracking through the accounts of some of the 
people affected by fracking at first-hand. The qualitative approach to Identity 
Process Theory provides insight into how the identity principles are concep-
tualised by individuals themselves (Coyle and Murtagh, 2014). It elucidates 
not only how intrinsic environmental values may be threatened, but also how 
the cultural values of continuity, self-efficacy etc may be similarly jeopardised 
by the implementation of fracking. Although threats to nature and culture are 
not easily disentangled, the qualitative approach employed in this article does 
allow for a more fine-grained analysis of such threats.
In research into wind energy development, there is generally a focus on 
the aesthetics of ‘industrializing landscapes’, which are linked to negative per-
ceptions of wind farms (Devine-Wright, 2005). In general, people are more 
likely to support the installation of smaller wind turbines as this is regarded 
as a means of limiting the negative visual impact of wind energy develop-
ment. Yet, in the context of fracking, the concerns voiced by laypeople are not 
only aesthetic, economic and environmental ones. People living with fracking 
worry about livelihoods, ways of life and daily life, from housing to traffic 
6.	
https://www.dur.ac.uk/refine/


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
FRACKING ON YOUTUBE
523
Environmental Values 23.5
to working in all-men working camps. These reflect the social and personal 
impacts that fracking may have on individuals and communities, as well as the 
relation between individuals and communities (winners and losers, supporters 
and sceptics and so on), which are normally sidelined in discussions about 
scientific evidence of risks or estimations of market values related to fracking. 
Qualitative research methods are particularly useful in examining the human 
identity implications of fracking by examining the first-hand accounts and con-
structions offered by community members.
It would appear that the human identity implications of fracking may be 
more complex than the implications of wind energy development, for instance, 
potentially affecting multiple principles of identity in both positive and nega-
tive ways, depending upon the position of social actors and broader social 
representations (Jaspal and Nerlich, 2014a). Fracking may have direct impacts 
on, and pose threats to, cherished elements of life such as air, water, earth and 
fire, as well as climate, but, most importantly it seems, it may have implica-
tions for and pose threats to how people involved in fracking or living near 
fracking sites lead their daily lives. This can impact one’s sense of continuity 
(Chandler et al., 2003). Yet, fracking may also have positive outcomes for self-
efficacy through the constructed benefits for employment and the economy 
(Bandura, 1997). This article did not set out to discuss how all of the princi-
ples may be affected but the qualitative approach allows us to identify how 
particular principles could be affected in potentially unexpected ways. Thus, 
the article opens up a debate on the human identity implications that fracking 
may have. Identity Process Theory (Breakwell, 1986) provides a useful heu-
ristic framework for understanding the forms of social psychological threat 
(and indeed, enhancement) that are represented as being associated with the 
implementation of fracking.
Jaspal, Nerlich and Cinnirella (2014) have argued that identity is an impor-
tant factor in both public understanding of, and public responses to, climate 
change and mitigation technologies, given that groups and individuals strive 
to safeguard the important principles that underlie their individual and social 
identities (i.e. continuity, coherence etc). Moreover, they highlight the impor-
tance of fine-grained qualitative approaches in understanding the subjective, 
phenomenological experiences of climate change and mitigation technologies. 
This article provides some insight into the forms of identity (including indi-
vidual and social value) threats that are constructed in high-impact YouTube 
clips on fracking. It shows what kinds of identity threat or enhancement may 
be constructed in order to either denigrate or promote the technology among 
the public. 
However, further research is needed. More specifically, the social and 
psychological consequences of fracking need to be studied, especially in the 
United States where fracking is as widespread as opposition to fracking (Negro, 
2012). The film Gasland began the process of looking at the impact of fracking 


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
RUSI JASPAL, ANDREW TURNER and BRIGITTE NERLICH 
524
Environmental Values 23.5
on communities, homeowner, landowners and gas workers, but more system-
atic and academic work is needed in the future. So far, it seems, individuals 
and social systems have scarcely been studied at all. There is no systematic 
study of ‘ecological, cultural, and other non-economic values’ in the context of 
fracking (Finewood and Stroup, 2012: 73). Our small-scale study of YouTube 
videos shows that there is a pressing need to better understand social systems, 
personal experiences and threats to identity, in addition to the important re-
search into economic and environmental systems. There is a long tradition 
of studying issues around the regulation of human and environmental risks, 
whereas thinking about human values in this context is as yet rare, although 
this might be changing within the emerging landscape of ‘responsible innova-
tion’ (Owen et al., 2013; Taebi et al. 2014). 
In this article, we decided to exploit the social constructivist potential in 
Identity Process Theory to examine how human and environmental values and 
identity principles are constructed as being threatened by the practice of frack-
ing in YouTube videos. This is important because constructions of threat may in 
turn feed into public understanding of fracking (Jaspal, Nerlich and Cinnirella, 
2014). Indeed, Identity Process Theory has long been associated with qualita-
tive research methods, partly because of its flexibility in application and its 
heuristic utility (Coyle and Murtagh, 2014). In future research using the theory, 
it would be useful to examine the perceived impact of fracking for identity 
among affected individuals using in-depth qualitative interview and quantita-
tive survey-based methods. While this research highlights which principles 
may be susceptible to influence in the context of fracking, it is descriptive and 
says little about the potential interactions between the identity principles. It is, 
for instance, unclear whether the threat to continuity, which seems to be associ-
ated with threats to intrinsic environment values, would be tolerable given the 
obvious potential that the employment and economic opportunities afforded by 
fracking can have for the self-efficacy principle of identity. Social psycholo-
gists can make an important contribution to this area. Moreover, it would be 
useful to examine the impact for particular identities, particularly place iden-
tity, which seems to be affected by fracking. This would complement existing 
research into place identity that has been fruitfully conducted in the context 
of wind energy and NIMBYism, for instance (Devine-Wright, 2009; Devine-
Wright and Howes, 2010). Such an integrative programme of research would 
shed further light on the human dimension of fracking, which unfortunately 
remains under-explored.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank the ESRC for their financial support of project RES-360–25–
0068 and the University of Nottingham for additional financial support.


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
FRACKING ON YOUTUBE
525
Environmental Values 23.5
REFERENCES
Bandura, A. 1997. Self-efficacy: The Exercise of Control. New York: Freeman.
Bonauito, M., G.M. Breakwell and I. Cano. 1998. ‘Identity processes and environmen-
tal threat: the effects of nationalism and local identity upon perception of beach 
pollution’. Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology 6(3): 157–75. 
CrossRef
Braun, V. and V. Clarke. 2006. ‘Using thematic analysis in psychology’. Qualitative 
Research in Psychology 3: 77–101. CrossRef
Breakwell G.M. 1986. Coping with Threatened Identities. London: Methuen.
Breakwell, G.M. 2010a. ‘Models of risk construction: some applications to climate 
change’. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change 1(6): 765–907.
Breakwell, G.M. 2010b. ‘Resisting Representations and Identity Processes’. Papers in 
Social Representations 19: 6.1–6.11.
Briggle, A. 2013. ‘Duck, rabbit, gas well: A Gestalt theory of the fracking de-
bate’. Science Progress (blog), 17 January: http://scienceprogress.org/2013/01/
duck-rabbit-gas-well/ 
Callicott, B. 1989. In Defense of the Land Ethic: Essays in Environmental Philosophy. 
Albany, NY: State University Press of New York Press.
Chandler, M.J., C.E. Lalonde, B. Sokol and D. Hallett. 2003. ‘Personal persistence, 
identity development, and suicide: a study of native and non-native North American 
adolescents’. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development 68(2): 
Serial No.273.
Coyle, A. and N. Murtagh. 2014. ‘Qualitative approaches to research using Identity 
Process Theory’. In R. Jaspal and G.M Breakwell (eds.) Identity Process Theory: 
Identity, Social Action and Social Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. pp. 41–64. CrossRef
Devine-Wright, P. 2005. ‘Beyond NIMBYism: Towards an integrated framework 
for understanding public perceptions of wind energy’. Wind Energy 8: 125–139. 
CrossRef
Devine-Wright, P. 2009. ‘Rethinking NIMBYism: The role of place attachment and 
place identity in explaining place-protective action’. Journal of Community and 
Applied Social Psychology 19(6): 426–41. CrossRef
Devine-Wright, P. and Y. Howes. 2010. ‘Disruptions to place attachment and the 
protection of restorative environments: A wind energy case study’. Journal of 
Environmental Psychology 30(1): 271–90. CrossRef
Dixon, J., K. Durrheim and A. Di Masso. 2014. ‘Places, identities and geopolitical 
change: Exploring the strengths and limits of Identity Process Theory’. In R. Jaspal 
and G.M Breakwell (eds.) Identity Process Theory: Identity, Social Action and 
Social Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 270–94. CrossRef
Elliot, R. 1992. ‘Intrinsic value, environmental obligation, and naturalness’. The Monist 
75: 138–60. CrossRef
Engelder, T. 2011. ‘Should fracking stop? No, it’s too valuable’. Nature 447: 271–75.
ESRC. 2012. http://www.esrc.ac.uk/impacts-and-findings/features-casestudies/fea-
tures/20493/Fracking_and_public_dialogue_.aspx


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
RUSI JASPAL, ANDREW TURNER and BRIGITTE NERLICH 
526
Environmental Values 23.5
Finewood, M.H. and L.J. Stroup. 2012. ‘Fracking and the neoliberalization of the hy-
dro-social cycle in Pennsylvania’s Marcellus Shale’. Journal of Contemporary 
Water Research and Education 147: 72–9. CrossRef
Forbis Jr. R and A. Kear. 2011. ‘Fracking across the USA: Disparate political responses 
to unconventional energy development’. Western Political Science Association 
2011 Annual Meeting Paper.
Fox, J. 2010. Gasland. New Video Group.
Freeman B. and S. Chapman. 2007. ‘Is ”YouTube” telling or selling you something? 
Tobacco content on the YouTube video-sharing website’. Tobacco Control 16(3): 
207–10.  CrossRef
Howarth, R.W. and A. Ingraffea. 2011. ‘Should fracking stop? Yes, it’s too high risk’. 
Nature 477: 271–75. CrossRef
Jasanoff, S. 2010. ‘A new climate for society’. Theory, Culture and Society 27(2–3): 
233–53. CrossRef
Jaspal, R. 2014. ‘Social psychological debates about identity’. In R. Jaspal and G.M 
Breakwell (eds.) Identity Process Theory: Identity, Social Action and Social 
Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 3–19. CrossRef
Jaspal, R. and M. Cinnirella. 2010. ‘Coping with potentially incompatible identities: 
accounts of religious, ethnic and sexual identities from British Pakistani men who 
identify as Muslim and gay’. British Journal of Social Psychology 49(4): 849–70. 
CrossRef
Jaspal, R., B. Nerlich and M. Cinnirella. 2014. ‘Human responses to climate change: 
Social representation, identity and socio-psychological action’. Environmental 
Communication: A Journal of Nature and Culture 8 (1): 110–30. CrossRef
Jaspal, R. and B. Nerlich. 2014a. ‘Fracking in the UK press: Threat dynamics in an 
unfolding debate’. Public Understanding of Science 23 (3) 348–63. CrossRef
Jaspal, R. and B. Nerlich. 2014b. ‘When climate science became climate politics: 
British media representations of climate change in 1988’. Public Understanding of 
Science 23 (2): 122–41. CrossRef
Jaspal, R., B. Nerlich and N. Koteyko. 2013. ‘Contesting science by appealing to its 
norms: Readers discuss climate science in The Daily Mail’. Science Communication 
35(3): 383–410. CrossRef
Keelan J., V. Pavri-Garcia, G. Tomlinson and K. Wilson. 2007. ‘YouTube as a source 
of information on immunization: a content analysis’. JAMA 298(21): 2482–4. 
CrossRef
Lashley, M. 2012. ‘Lip dubbing on YouTube: Participatory culture and cultural global-
ization’. Transformative Works and Cultures 11. (online) CrossRef
Lyons, E. 1996. ‘Coping with social change: processes of social memory in the recon-
struction of identities’. In G.M. Breakwell and E. Lyons (eds.) Changing European 
Identities: Social Psychological Analyses of Social Change, pp.31–40. Oxford: 
Butterworth-Heinemann.
Mooney, C. 2011. ‘The truth about fracking’. Scientific American 305: 80–5. CrossRef
Negro, E.E. 2012. ‘Fracking wars: Federal, state and local conflicts over the regulation 
of natural gas activities’. Zoning and Planning Law Report 35(2): 1–13.


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
FRACKING ON YOUTUBE
527
Environmental Values 23.5
Nerlich, B. 2010. ‘“Climategate”: Paradoxical metaphors and political paralysis’. 
Environmental Values 19(4): 419–42. CrossRef
Nerlich, B. and R. Jaspal. 2013. ‘UK media representations of carbon capture and stor-
age: Actors, frames and metaphors’. Metaphor and the Social World 3 (1): 35–53. 
CrossRef
O’Hara, S., M. Humphrey, R. Jaspal, B. Nerlich and M. Poberezshkaya. 2012. ‘Shale 
gas extraction in the UK: What people think’ http://www.scribd.com/doc/98974352/
Public-Perceptions-of-Shale-Gas-in-the-UK-7
O’Hara, S. M. Humphrey, R. Jaspal, B. Nerlich and M. Poberezshkaya. 2013. 
‘Public perception of shale gas extraction in the UK: How people’s views are 
changing’ 
http://ground-gassolutions.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/Nottm_
PublicPerceptionsShaleGasUK_Mar2013.pdf 
Owen, R., J. Bessant and M. Heintz (eds) 2013. Responsible Innovation: Managing 
the Responsible Innovation of Science and Innovation in Society. Chichester: John 
Wiley and Sons. CrossRef
Pandey A., N. Patni, M. Singh, A. Sood and G. Singh. 2010. ‘YouTube as a source of 
information on the H1N1 influenza pandemic’. American Journal of Preventive 
Medicine 38(3): e1–e3.  CrossRef
Phadke, R. 2011. ‘Resisting and reconciling Big Wind: Middle landscape politics in the 
New American West’. Antipode 43(3): 754–76. CrossRef
Porter, A.J. and I.R. Hellsten. In press. ‘Investigating social media responses to com-
plex social problems using a multi-determinant framework: The case of climategate 
on YouTube’. Journal of Computer Mediated Communication. CrossRef
The Royal Society and The Royal Academy of Engineering 2012. ‘Shale gas extraction 
in the UK: a review of hydraulic fracturing’. June 2012: royalsociety.org/policy/
projects/shale-gas-extraction and raeng.org.uk/shale
Schwartz, S.H. 1992. ‘Universals in the content and structure of values: Theory and 
empirical tests in 20 countries’. In M. Zanna (ed.), Advances in Experimental Social 
Psychology, pp. 1–65. New York: Academic Press.
Slezak, M. 2012. ‘Methane leaks suggest fracking benefits exaggerated’. New Scientist, 21 
November, http://www.newscientist.com/article/dn22521-methane-leaks-suggest-
fracking-benefits-exaggerated.html?goback=.gde_67258_member_188195707
Steingraber, S. and others. 2011. ‘Letter to the Honorable Andrew M. Cuomo, Governor 
of New York State’. 12 December 2011. Available at: http://steingraber.com/word-
press/wp-content/uploads/CancerFrackingDec12.pdf
Stiles, W.B. 1999. ‘Evaluating qualitative research’, Evidence-based Mental Health 2: 
99–101.  CrossRef
Taebi, B., A. Correljé, E. Cuppen, M. Dignum and U. Pesch. 2014. ‘Responsible inno-
vation and an endorsement of public values: the need for interdisciplinary research’. 
Journal of Responsible Innovation 1 (1): 118–124. CrossRef
Van Sant, G. 2012. Promised Land. Participant media.


University of Bristol Library = username
$REMOTE_ASSR = IP address
Fri, 09 Oct 2015 11:25:16 = Date & Time
