Vol.:(0123456789)
Climatic Change (2024) 177:73
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-024-03729-y
1 3
Beyond climate change? Environmental discourse 
on the planetary boundaries in Twitter networks
Shreya Dubey1   · Marijn H. C. Meijers1   · Eline S. Smit1   · Edith G. Smit1 
Received: 16 January 2023 / Accepted: 6 April 2024 / Published online: 25 April 2024 
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Social media are increasingly used to obtain and disseminate information about environ-
mental issues. Yet, environmental communication research has focused mainly on social 
media discussions pertaining to climate change, while overlooking public awareness and 
discourse regarding the other planetary boundaries (i.e., important and interlinked envi-
ronmental issues other than climate change). Moreover, while discussions about climate 
change are often found to be polarising, it remains to be seen if this extends to other envi-
ronmental issues. We used network analysis and topic modelling to analyse two million 
environment-related tweets and identified nine ‘green communities’ of users. Climate 
change was the most popular issue across all communities and other issues like biodiver-
sity loss were discussed infrequently. The discourse was less polarised than previously 
assumed, was largely pro-environmental, and originated more from the Global North than 
the Global South. The relevance of our findings for policymakers and researchers in envi-
ronmental communication is discussed.
Keywords  social media · environmental communication · topic modelling · network 
analysis · public discourse
 *	 Shreya Dubey 
	
s.dubey3@uva.nl
	
Marijn H. C. Meijers 
	
m.h.c.meijers@uva.nl
	
Eline S. Smit 
	
e.s.smit@uva.nl
	
Edith G. Smit 
	
e.g.smit@uva.nl
1	
Amsterdam School of Communication Research, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands


	
Climatic Change (2024) 177:73
1 3
73 
Page 2 of 23
1  Beyond climate change? Environmental discourse on the planetary 
boundaries in Twitter networks
Social media have become important fora for public discussions about environmental 
issues, encompassing topics such as climate change and sustainability (Ghermandi et al. 
2023; Pearce et al. 2019). This vital role of social media for environmental discussions is 
underscored by a notable surge in climate change mentions, with a growth of 50% observed 
in a sample of English tweets from 2013-2020 (Build for Good n.d.). By fostering discus-
sions and debates among various voices present in the public sphere, social media pro-
vide a communicative space for collective interpretation of new information (Jovchelovitch 
1995; Sarrica et al. 2018). Consequently, individuals turn to social media for both obtain-
ing environment-related news and sharing their own environmental views by (re)sharing 
environmental content (Cody et al. 2015; von Nordheim et al. 2018). An examination of 
the environmental content on social media can provide us with a snapshot of the prevailing 
public discourse, highlighting which issues are currently emphasised as well as those that 
warrant more attention.
So far, environmental communication research on social media has focused primarily on 
climate change while overlooking other interlinked issues that similarly affect the planet’s 
future (Barrios-O’Neill 2021; Chang et al. 2022a). Nine such dynamic environmental pro-
cesses (e.g., climate change, ocean acidification, loss of biosphere integrity) and their asso-
ciated thresholds are explicated in the planetary boundaries framework that demarcates the 
safe space for humanity to thrive (Rockström et al. 2009). Alarmingly, six of these bounda-
ries, namely, biosphere integrity, land-system change, freshwater use, biochemical flows, 
novel entities (e.g., plastic pollution), and climate change, have already been crossed due 
to human activities, also putting other boundaries under pressure (Richardson et al. 2023). 
Thus, environmental problems other than climate change also warrant attention, but little is 
known about public discourse about the other planetary boundaries on social media.
Besides utilising social media as a communicative space for deliberation on environ-
mental issues, users follow information from peers with similar interests and engage in 
debates. Often, such interactions take place in user networks comprising of mutual connec-
tions – or communities of like-minded users connected to each other (Sachan et al. 2012). 
Accordingly, discussions in distinct network clusters (or communities) reflect prioritised 
areas and sentiments of the public about an issue (Chang et al. 2022b; Lutkenhaus et al. 
2019). Thus, user discussions in such communities on social media could help us under-
stand people’s current awareness and opinions about environmental issues. This study 
aimed to provide an overview of the public environmental discourse on Twitter (now X) 
by expanding our focus beyond climate change to include environmental issues related to 
all planetary boundaries. While doing so, we also added to the often Global-North centred 
social media research (Comfort and Park 2018; Pearce et al. 2019) by examining the extent 
to which users in the Global South featured in these environmental discussions.
1.1  Green communities on social media
The environmental content viewed and shared by users as well as the people who com-
prise their social network can provide insights into the prevalent environmental dis-
course. Moreover, users with similar environmental views may form online commu-
nities on social media, aided by individual and algorithmic factors (Gasparetti et  al. 


Climatic Change (2024) 177:73	
1 3
Page 3 of 23 
73
2021). Specifically, users can personalise their information feeds by connecting with 
others who have similar views, often ending up in communities of like-minded peers 
(Terren and Borge-Bravo 2021; Williams et  al. 2015). Hence, users on social media 
likely connect with people who have similar environmental views to form virtual com-
munities, or what we term ‘green communities’, i.e., network clusters of Twitter users 
with mutual connections who discuss environmental topics. Although the term “green” 
generally implies a pro-environmental context, green communities can include positive, 
negative, or neutral environmental sentiments. The content shared within green commu-
nities may be suggestive of environmental topics that the members discuss and view on 
their Twitter feeds.
Studies have explored virtual communities related to various issues like vaccination 
(Lutkenhaus et al. 2019), the political divide (Grömping 2014; Takikawa and Nagayoshi 
2017), and climate change (Williams et al. 2015). However, research on online environ-
mental communication is scarce and prioritises the issue of climate change over other 
environmental issues (Adam et al. 2020; Pearce et al. 2019). Furthermore, most studies 
focus on communities with extreme views on climate change (Adam et al. 2020; Chen 
et al. 2019). Inevitably, such studies have found polarised discourses on social media, 
comprising, on the one hand, sceptical users who deny climate change (e.g., Chen et al. 
2019; Enders et al. 2021; Jang and Hart 2015) and, on the other hand, alarmed users 
motivated to take action to mitigate the threats posed by climate change (e.g., Boulianne 
et al. 2020; Segerberg and Bennett 2011). However, it is not clear whether such findings 
regarding polarisation also apply to other environmental topics like biodiversity loss or 
plastic pollution. This is because while climate change can be perceived as a polaris-
ing topic (Cody et al. 2015; Falkenberg et al. 2022; Fownes et al. 2018), environmental 
issues like conservation generally tend to garner a more positive sentiment from Twitter 
users (Chang et al. 2022b). Therefore, it is important to map the online discourse with a 
focus on broader environmental problems (i.e., the planetary boundaries).
Some previous evidence indicates that environmental discourse on social media may 
extend beyond the much-highlighted narratives of climate change (Grouverman et al. 
2018; Pilař et al. 2019). In an analysis of general sustainability related Twitter hashtags 
worldwide, Pilař et al. (2019) found that climate change was only the third most popular 
hashtag, trailing behind ‘innovation’ and ‘environment’. Also, tweets not directly men-
tioning the environment may still contain information about behaviours which help in 
combatting environmental problems but undertaken without a direct pro-environmental 
motivation, such as eating less meat and promoting sustainable energy consumption 
(Grouverman et al. 2018).
Identifying green communities with diverse environmental discussions will facilitate 
an all-encompassing understanding of how people construe the environmental chal-
lenges threatening our planet. Examining tweets in green communities will elucidate 
which environmental topics are popular among the public – and which could use some 
more attention. Therefore, the present study aimed to understand the environmental dis-
course on Twitter by distinguishing online communities of people who post environ-
mental content. We examined discussion topics and sentiments in green communities 
via textual analysis and pinpointed user characteristics.
RQ1.
(a)	 Which types of online communities, i.e., ‘green communities’, exist on Twitter?
(b)	 Which environment-related topics are discussed in distinct green communities?


	
Climatic Change (2024) 177:73
1 3
73 
Page 4 of 23
(c)	 What are the characteristics of users in green communities based on their profile infor-
mation?
(d)	 What are the sentiments underlying environmental discussions in green communities?
We also investigated the extent to which green communities interact with each other 
to understand the content users are exposed to via their connections. This allowed us to 
examine whether, like climate change, conversations about other environmental topics may 
also take place in polarised and distinct networks of users or if they tend to be discussed by 
users across all networks.
RQ2. How do distinct green communities interact with each other, i.e., which connec-
tions are shared across networks?
1.2  Green communities in the Global North and Global South
Studies show that online discourse about global issues such as climate change is largely 
dominated by actors in the Global North1 (Kirilenko and Stepchenkova 2014; Liu and Zhao 
2017; Vu et al. 2020). Vu et al. (2020) reported that NGOs from the Global North domi-
nated conversations related to climate change on Twitter, effectively influencing the types 
of issues and content that make up a large part of the online discourse. This geographical 
inequity is alarming because while countries in the Global North are the major instigators 
of environmental crises, those in the Global South are the most vulnerable to the effects of 
said crises (Eckstein et al. 2021; Yin et al. 2021).
Research into environmental discourse on social media has also been conducted in the 
Global North while overlooking discourse in the Global South (Comfort and Park 2018). It 
is however important to capture both because the diverse sociocultural and historical con-
text of Global South countries may emphasise other environmental issues than those popu-
lar in the Global North and/or may discuss environmental topics differently (Dwivedi 2001; 
Kazansky et al. 2022; Morrow et al. 2020). Global South perspectives indeed demonstrate 
that “a southern flavour” (Thaker 2021, p. 194) of the natural environment contextualises it 
in relation to issues of livelihood, sustenance, and access to resources in post-colonial soci-
eties. This is different than the environmental notions prevalent in the Global North, which 
are more centred on preventing overuse and exploitation (Thaker 2021). Hence, mapping 
where environmental tweets originate captures the contributions of the Global North vs 
South in environmental dialogue:
 RQ3. To what extent do tweets from the different green communities originate in the 
Global North vs the Global South?
2  Methods
To investigate our RQs, we conducted a social media study that was approved by the Eth-
ics Review Board of the Faculty of Social and Behavioural Sciences at the University of 
Amsterdam [reference: 2021-PC-14277]. The study plan was preregistered on the Open 
1  Global North and Global South reflect a distinction between countries that have higher and lower rates of 
human development respectively. While not geographically absolute, these terms are preferred to previous 
descriptors such as first world and third world which tend to emphasise primacy of certain nation states.


Climatic Change (2024) 177:73	
1 3
Page 5 of 23 
73
Science Framework (OSF; https://​osf.​io/​wef2z/). Data collection and analysis were con-
ducted using R (R Core Team 2021). The data and analysis scripts from this study are 
available on the OSF project page (https://​osf.​io/​kg43n/) which also contains the supple-
mentary materials (with an index of all shared materials).
2.1  Data collection
2.1.1  Selecting the tweets
We retrieved global English language tweets via a full archive search of the Twitter Appli-
cation Programming Interface (API v2) using the academictwitteR package (Barrie et al. 
2022). The selection of search terms can impact textual analysis of the retrieved data (Mahl 
et al. 2022; Stryker et al. 2006), so we measured the efficiency of search terms used in this 
study as previously recommended (Lacy et al. 2015; Stryker et al. 2006).
For this, we preregistered 58 open search terms based on the nine planetary bounda-
ries framework (Rockström et al. 2009), previous literature (Cameletti et al. 2022.; Gaytan 
Camarillo et al. 2021; Pilař et al. 2019), and researcher consensus (all authors). A pilot 
dataset (n = 5000) containing tweets, retweets, and quote tweets retrieved from this list was 
used to evaluate the efficiency of the search terms, usually indicated by recall and precision 
values (Stryker et al. 2006). We did not calculate recall as it is not possible to estimate the 
total number of relevant documents (i.e., number of tweets containing the search terms), 
but instead reported the proportion of tweets retrieved by each search term in our sample to 
be able to provide a distribution of the search terms across retrieved tweets.
Additionally, for a subset of the data (n = 500), we manually calculated the precision 
(i.e., relevance) of search terms. A relevant tweet referred to a tweet related to the environ-
ment. In doing so, we observed that some search terms showed little precision, retrieving 
many irrelevant tweets. For instance, the search term “toxic” retrieved the second highest 
number of tweets (14.6%, 73 of 500 tweets) but only 3 of these tweets were relevant (preci-
sion = 4%). To ensure a relevant collection of tweets, we removed search terms with pre-
cision values less than .5 (for details, see supplementary materials). Moreover, 11 search 
terms retrieved no tweets, but we decided to keep them in our list of closed search terms 
because absence of tweets relating to these terms (e.g., “planetary boundaries”, “circular 
economy”, etc.) may indicate that although relevant in academic literature, some topics 
have yet to become mainstream. Finally, we shortlisted 50 closed search terms for collect-
ing tweets for the main dataset (n = 2,000,000). These included original tweets, retweets, 
replies, and comments, but not advertisements.
2.1.2  Retrieving the Twitter network
To construct the egocentric user network for community detection, we retrieved the con-
nections of the authors of the collected tweets. A total of 1,133,748 unique users were 
identified as authors in our sample of 2 million tweets, which was reduced to 904,043 after 
removing users with private profiles (n = 229,705). The total number of followers (users 
who follow the authors) was 6,053,998,317 whereas the total number of friends (users fol-
lowed by the authors) was 1,181,490,733. Per API limitations, we retrieved a maximum of 
1 million followers for users with more than a million followers (n = 187) and restricted the 
maximum number of friends to 5000. Thus, for 904,043 authors, we retrieved 532,297,774 
followers and 131,073,118 friends. Following the approach of Lutkenhaus et al. (2019), 


	
Climatic Change (2024) 177:73
1 3
73 
Page 6 of 23
we examined the distribution of the number of connections for the authors to determine a 
cut-off point to exclude users (friends and followers) who were not connected to a mini-
mum of 5 authors, so that the retrieved network would reflect shared audiences. The overall 
network contained 324,028,112 users comprising a total of 367,465,523 connections with 
authors, followers, and friends in an egocentric network.
2.2  Data analysis
We examined the first research question in four steps. First, to determine which green com-
munities exist on Twitter (RQ1a) we identified network clusters using the Louvain algo-
rithm. Second, we examined the content of the tweets (RQ1b) via topic modelling. We 
compared the extracted topics across communities to distinguish environmental discourses 
in distinct green communities. Third, we analysed the profile texts of the users to describe 
the users in these communities (RQ1c). Fourth, we conducted a manual analysis on a sub-
set of one hundred tweets per community to explore the underlying sentiments within each 
green community (RQ1d).
To examine whether distinct green communities interact with each other (RQ2), we 
conducted a network analysis to visualise the communication flows between green com-
munities. Finally, to investigate where in the world these tweets originated (RQ3), we 
compared the proportions of geo-tagged authors belonging to the Global North and Global 
South.
2.2.1  Community detection
Community detection was used to identify green communities (RQ1a), i.e., groups of 
users based on common connections in their Twitter network. We used the igraph pack-
age in R (Csardi and Nepusz 2005) which applies the Louvain algorithm for community 
detection (Blondel et al. 2008). The Louvain algorithm tries to optimise modularity for 
each identified cluster by first assigning each node to its own cluster and then shuffling the 
nodes until modularity is maximised. The Louvain method is a relatively accurate and fast 
method for community detection in large networks (Mukerjee 2021). In our retrieved Twit-
ter network, users (authors, followers, and friends) are represented as nodes, while the con-
nections between them are represented as edges. We retained communities that comprised 
at least 1% of users in the network (Lutkenhaus et al. 2019).
2.2.2  Topic modelling
We employed topic modelling to examine the environmental themes (topics) of tweets 
in green communities (RQ1b). For this, we extracted the original tweets (n = 571, 449) 
written by the authors, i.e., tweets that were not quote tweets or retweets. The tweets 
from each community were denoted as a separate document and the distribution of 
topics and terms was determined using the latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) approach 
(Blei et al. 2003). To analyse the tweets, we used the topicmodels package (Grün and 
Hornik 2011) in R to create a document feature matrix (DFM). To create the matrix, we 
pre-processed the tweets according to the preregistered steps as recommended in previ-
ous research (Maier et al. 2018). We removed the irrelevant tweet components such as 
URLs, mentions (@), and retweets (RT); divided the tweets into word units (tokenisa-
tion) and converted all letters to lowercase; deleted special characters and punctuation 


Climatic Change (2024) 177:73	
1 3
Page 7 of 23 
73
marks; and removed English stop words such as ‘the’, ‘is’, ‘are’, etc using the list 
included in the topicmodels package. In a deviation from our preregistered criteria, we 
applied only the lower limit of pruning to remove all the terms that occurred in less 
than 1% of all the tweets. This was decided upon observing that removing terms that 
occurred in more than 95% of the tweets resulted in elimination of highly relevant terms 
such as “climate”, “environment”, “sustainability”, etc. The resulting DFM comprised 
of 9 documents and 209,532 features.
To identify a suitable number of topics (K), we calculated the evaluation metrics for 
different topics by varying the different combinations for number of topics and docu-
ment-topic densities while keeping the value of β fixed at 1/K, using the ldatuning pack-
age (Nikita and Chaney 2020). Following this approach, we decided on K = 20 with α 
= .01 for our topic model (details in supplementary materials). To understand the envi-
ronmental discourses in each community, we examined the per-document-per-topic prob-
abilities (gamma), since each document included tweets from a green community identified 
via community detection. We created word clouds to show the most frequently occurring 
terms for each community with the wordcloud package in R (Fellows 2018). The result-
ing descriptions of the green communities were discussed by two of the authors (SD & 
MM) and agreed upon by all authors. Further robustness tests were conducted to evaluate 
the topic models during peer-review process, confirming the major results of our analysis 
(please see supplementary materials for details).
2.2.3  Profile text analysis
Profile description texts for each user in the network (authors, followers, and friends) were 
examined to understand which types of users constitute the green communities (RQ1c). 
This text analysis was conducted using the same pre-processing steps as those for topic 
modelling (Maier et al. 2018). The most frequent terms in user profile texts were obtained 
by assigning TF-IDF weights using the tm package (Feinerer et al. 2008).
2.2.4  Sentiment analysis
To identify the underlying sentiment in the tweets of the different green communities 
(RQ1d), we manually examined 100 tweets per green community (n = 900) containing the 
most likely terms and topics. That is, we identified the topic most strongly associated with 
a community and retrieved one hundred tweets that contained the most likely terms related 
to that topic. These tweets were coded as positive if they pertained to pro-environmental 
issues and action, negative if they dismissed pro-environmental issues and action, and neu-
tral if they did not contain an explicit pro- or anti- environmental sentiment.
2.2.5  Network analysis
To answer RQ2, we examined the mutual connections between distinct green communities 
to visualise interactions. Specifically, we quantified the number of users within each com-
munity that followed users from other communities to show the extent to which users in a 


	
Climatic Change (2024) 177:73
1 3
73 
Page 8 of 23
particular green community are likely to be exposed to users from another community, as 
described in Lutkenhaus et al. (2019).
2.2.6  Comparing geotagged members
Finally, to investigate the extent to which tweets in green communities originate from 
the Global North vs the Global South (RQ3), we looked at geo-tagged tweets. In line 
with previous estimates (Huang and Carley 2019; Karami et al. 2021), location of only 
14.51% of all authors was tagged in our sample (n = 82,906). For this subset of geo-
tagged authors, we manually coded 7433 unique locations (countries, cities, towns, etc.) 
as belonging to either the Global North or Global South. We compared the proportions 
of authors from these two regions for each green community to determine which region 
contributed most to the online environmental discourse.
3  Results
3.1  Identifying green communities
To identify online green communities on Twitter (RQ1), we examined the network of 
users who posted the retrieved environmental tweets. A total of 20,003 communities 
were identified using the Louvain algorithm for community detection, with a modular-
ity score of 0.63 indicating a community structure comprising clusters of densely con-
nected users. After removing green communities consisting of less than 1% of users 
in the network, nine green communities were selected for further analysis. A total of 
97.32% nodes and 96.56% edges were retained in this truncated network. Table  A1 
(Appendix A in supplementary materials) details the characteristics of the green com-
munities, including the proportion of users in the total network within each green com-
munity, proportion (and number) of authors, i.e., the users who wrote the tweets, and 
author networks (followers and friends).
Figure  1 depicts green communities comprising the authors and their network of 
followers and friends. Each green community is represented by a distinct colour and 
the labels are derived based on the prominent discussion topics identified via topic 
modelling.
3.2  Green communities: popular topics, members, and sentiment
For RQ1b, which aimed to identify the environment-related topics being discussed in dis-
tinct green communities, we analysed original tweets posted by the authors (n = 571,449). 
Generally, users in all green communities posted most frequently about climate change, 
with ‘climate’ and ‘change’ being the top two most frequent terms in the corpus. Although 
we cast a wide net with many keywords pertaining to other planetary boundaries, climate 
change was by far the most discussed planetary boundary. Given that it was the most popu-
lar topic across all communities and to portray the prominence of climate change in dis-
cussions, the community names incorporated climate change as the unifying label across 
communities, followed by the labels that differentiated their environmental content. The 


Climatic Change (2024) 177:73	
1 3
Page 9 of 23 
73
Note. Accessible versions of all figures for readers with colour-blindness 278 are available in supplementary
materials.
Fig. 1   Network graph showing the green communities
Fig. 2   Topic distribution for all green communities


	
Climatic Change (2024) 177:73
1 3
73 
Page 10 of 23
community names are based upon the environmental discourse within the community (i.e., 
prominent topics, Table B1 in Appendix B). A list of the top one hundred terms within 
each topic is provided on the OSF project page.
As shown in Fig. 2, sustainability was the most popular topic across all communi-
ties, followed by politics, impact, and future respectively. Figure 3 shows the distribu-
tion of topics in each green community.
The following section details the environmental discourse and member characteris-
tics for green communities (RQs 1b-1d). The word clouds generated to describe each 
green community are provided in Appendix C and example tweets are provided in 
Appendix D.
3.2.1  Climate change and hope (CC‑Hope)
The largest community of users (53% of the total network) tweeted about a wide range 
of environmental issues including climate change, carbon emissions, and fossil fuels. 
The tweets in this community stressed the importance of sustainability, shared news 
about environment-friendly policies, supported social movements and calls for global 
and local climate action, while expressing hope for a better future. Climate justice was 
also discussed and tweets about indigenous climate-friendly practices, redistribution 
of wealth, and information about local climate initiatives were included. Moreover, 
tweets offered tips for individual eco-friendly behaviours such as reducing plastic use, 
recycling, and reducing waste.
Analysis of user profile descriptions indicated a range of professions such as activ-
ist, author, founder, director, and advocate in areas such as policy, business, tech, poli-
tics, health. Climate, news, science, love, and nature were some of the most frequently 
Note. Since each community was represented by a document consisting of the tweets of its authors, this
proportion of topics is obtained by calculating the per-document-per-topic probabilities (gamma) of the corpus.
Fig. 3   Topic distribution in each green community


Climatic Change (2024) 177:73	
1 3
Page 11 of 23 
73
occurring terms. A manually coded subset of tweets (n = 100) revealed that the overall 
sentiment was positive (89%), whereas a minority were negative (7%) or neutral (4%).
3.2.2  Climate change and action (CC‑Action)
The second largest green community (13% of the total network) tweeted mostly about 
climate action, such as various national climate policies. Tweets also promoted innova-
tion in the energy technology, irrigation and agriculture, and housing sectors. Major 
areas of discussion involved highlighting steps being taken to combat climate change, 
such as creating solutions to plastic waste, policy efforts to achieve carbon neutrality, 
environmental innovations, etc. Users demanded urgent climate action while emphasis-
ing the negative consequences of climate change and reacted to climate change sceptics 
via their tweets – to correct, to express anger, and to demand climate action.
Profile descriptions indicated that the users in this community were mainly media, 
entertainment, and news professionals such as editors, journalists, and authors. In a 
manual analysis of a subset of tweets (n = 100), 8% tweets were found to be unrelated to 
the environment. Of the remaining 92 tweets, 3% tweets contained a negative sentiment 
whereas 97% were positive.
3.2.3  Climate change and knowledge (CC‑Knowledge)
This green community (9% of the total network) discussed educational tweets about 
environmental problems as well as their solutions. Users in this community tweeted 
posts to stress the need for climate action both on an individual and political level as 
well as to dispel sceptical narratives. Sustainability in everyday choices such as food, 
clothing, transport, air-travel, reducing and recycling while managing waste was also 
emphasised. Moreover, users shared green practices adopted within local communities 
and by global industries in aviation, sporting, and transport sectors.
The profile descriptions of users suggested that the main areas of user interest were 
politics and news, comprising of various professionals such as photographers, writ-
ers, directors, artists, and journalists. Out of 100 manually examined tweets, 95% were 
coded as positive, 2% coded as negative and 3% coded as neutral.
3.2.4  Climate change and science (CC‑Science)
Community users (7.5% of the total network) posted about environmental topics related 
to scientific advancements, scientists’ protests for climate actions, and news and facts 
about the effects of environmental degradation. Users emphasised the need for urgent 
collective and political action to mitigate the climate crisis and discussed scientific 
research and innovations related to climate change and other environmental problems 
such as biodiversity loss and plastic-pollution. Users tweeted about the scientific con-
sensus on the existence of climate change and interdisciplinary research about the 
effects of climate change such as rising sea levels, habitat degradation, loss of biodiver-
sity (especially insects), and urban air and water pollution, among others. Tweets also 
related to the need for efforts to increase the public’s awareness of climate change.


	
Climatic Change (2024) 177:73
1 3
73 
Page 12 of 23
The profile descriptions of the users in this community indicated that it comprised 
of researchers, scientists, and those involved in health and public work. Out of one hun-
dred tweets, 99% were coded as positive whereas 1% were coded as neutral.
3.2.5  Climate change and sustainability (CC‑Sustainability)
Users in this community (4% of the total network) mainly tweeted about Earth Day 
and ensuring a sustainable future with the help of innovation and technology industries 
incorporating Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) practices. Tweets related 
to promotion of sustainability practices by businesses and technology companies, but 
also local governments, largely to commemorate Earth Day. Since data were collected 
during the week of Earth Day, celebratory posts were common, with tweets discussing 
the need for more sustainability initiatives, protecting natural resources, and decreasing 
emissions. Tweets also indicated the need for sustainable and green finance initiatives, 
the role automation and data analytics can play in combating climate change, and bal-
ancing economic growth with sustainability goals.
Based on the profile descriptions, the users in this green community comprised 
of business, marketing, media, and technology professionals such as CEOs, editors, 
authors, engineers, and investors In a manually coded subset of one hundred tweets, 
only 1% were negative, whereas all the others had a positive environmental sentiment.
3.2.6  Climate change and health (CC‑Health)
The users in this community (2% of the total network) posted about the effect of cli-
mate change on the health of our planet and its inhabitants. Tweets included issues like 
the consequences of extreme-weather events like floods and wildfires on human lives, 
the GHG emissions resulting from fossil-fuel based transportation (cars and airplanes), 
and food scarcity due to warmer temperatures. The prominent discussions focused on 
the links between planetary health and human health. Tweets emphasised the effects 
of climate change becoming obvious in day-to-day living such as the effects of climate 
change on food supply, effects of air pollution on breathing clean air, and effects of 
chemicals in the food system on quality of life of people. Sustainable lifestyle habits 
such as using plant-based skincare items and adopting vegan diets were promoted in 
these tweets. Innovations in sustainable living were also discussed in this green com-
munity, with users tweeting about the popularity of plant-based food options, increase 
in parks and forest areas, and upcoming climate-friendly energy sources.
Profile descriptions indicated a wide range of professionals such as teachers, psychol-
ogists, artists, advocates, and managers. One hundred tweets were manually examined 
for their underlying sentiment, of which 87% were coded as positive, 9% were coded as 
negative, and 4% were coded as neutral.
3.2.7  Climate change and energy (CC‑Energy)
The most frequently discussed topics in this community (1.3% of the total network) 
included renewable energy, carbon tax, carbon footprints, and climate action denial. 
Users also tweeted about the effects of climate colonialism on the countries in Global 
South, the need for nuclear power as a renewable energy source, and policy action in 


Climatic Change (2024) 177:73	
1 3
Page 13 of 23 
73
the US to combat climate change. The main areas of discussion identified for this com-
munity related to the energy sector, ranging from debating the use of nuclear power 
to reduce carbon footprint, levying of carbon taxes to offset carbon footprint, and the 
greenwashing by oil, aviation, and fossil-fuel companies taking inadequate steps to fulfil 
their promises of going net zero.
User profile descriptions included terms like business, sustainability, activist, founder, 
and non-profit, indicating the presence of a variety of users. In a subset of hundred tweets, 
86% were coded as positive whereas 14% tweets were coded as negative.
3.2.8  Climate change and solutions (CC‑Solutions)
The users in this green community (1.2% of the total network) tweeted about solutions for 
environmental problems as well as the global inequity surrounding climate change. After 
climate change, solutions for plastic pollution (including microplastics) and rising green-
house gas emissions were the most frequently discussed environmental problems. Most 
prominent discussions related to sustainability in food choices, low-emission transporta-
tion, investment in innovation for clean energy, ways to reduce single-use plastic consump-
tion, and highlighting the need for equitable and just climate action. Environmental effects 
of animal agriculture, switching to plant-based and vegan food options, and benefits of low 
carbon transit (electric vehicles and cycles) were other important discussion points. Users 
in this community tweeted about the global disparity in climate action and the dangers of 
climate change for vulnerable populations, such as indigenous communities, women, per-
sons with disability, and those with restricted access to reproductive healthcare.
The analysis of profile descriptions indicates that the users in this community were 
largely innovation, business, and policy professionals including company presidents, strate-
gists, and commissioners. Of the one hundred tweets selected for sentiment analysis, 96% 
were coded as positive, 3% were coded as negative, and 1% were coded neutral.
3.2.9  Climate change and society (CC‑Society)
Environmental discourse in this community (1% of the total network) was mainly educa-
tional and information-oriented, with users tweeting about the societal threats posed by 
the fossil-fuel industry as well as promoting urgent solutions and initiatives to counter cli-
mate change. Users referenced Earth Day and urged for more societal sustainability initia-
tives, such as in the energy and infrastructure sectors. Major discussions in this commu-
nity included stressing the existence of climate change, highlighting the role of fossil fuel 
industry in delaying climate action, urging governments to act against the threats posed by 
climate change, and suggesting solutions for transition to renewable energy.
The profile descriptions indicate that the users in this community included PhDs (either 
holders or those currently pursuing), defence and security professionals, and those in 
energy transition companies. The subset of tweets (n = 100) containing the most common 
terms showed an overall pro-environmental sentiment (99% of the tweets), with only one 
tweet coded as negative and no neutral tweets.
3.3  Interactions between green communities
To answer the second research question about interactions between green communities, we 
calculated and visualised the extent to which users followed those from outside their own 


	
Climatic Change (2024) 177:73
1 3
73 
Page 14 of 23
Note. The direction of the arrows indicates the target of a node, i.e., the users being followed.
aThe prominent interactions in this figure have been brushed to improve readability. The original figure is 
provided in the supplementary materials (see SM 1, figure 4).
Fig. 4   Interactions between green communities – following users from other communities
Note. The top bar represents authors from the Global North whereas the bottom bar indicates authors from the
Global South.
Fig. 5   Representation of the Global North and Global South in Twitter environmental discourse


Climatic Change (2024) 177:73	
1 3
Page 15 of 23 
73
green community (Fig. 4). We found that users across distinct network clusters or green 
communities interacted with each other, with little evidence of polarised clusters. Please 
see Appendix E for further details.
3.4  Geographical representation in green communities
We examined RQ3 about the origins of environmental tweets between the Global North 
and Global South. The discourse in every green community was dominated by authors in 
the Global North, with only CC-Hope and CC-Society communities comprising more than 
5% of the authors from the Global South (Fig. 5). Authors from the Global South were 
least represented in CC-Health and CC-Science communities, comprising less than 1% of 
the authors.
4  Discussion
The environmental content shared by people on social media reflects their views towards 
the environment, thereby offering a way to tap into the public discourse about important 
environmental issues. We examined Twitter content beyond climate change by including 
other interlinked environmental issues (i.e., the planetary boundaries). By analysing net-
works of users who posted environmental content on Twitter, we identified nine different 
clusters of users (i.e., green communities), the topics discussed in these communities, and 
their typical authors. We also examined the interactions between green communities and 
explored the extent to which tweets originated in the Global North and Global South.
4.1  Climate change is the most discussed environmental topic on Twitter
Whereas natural scientists focus on nine planetary boundaries that are all seen as impor-
tant for sustaining the level of civilization we currently have (Rockström et al. 2009), our 
results show that the discourse on Twitter is mostly about climate change. Other planetary 
boundaries such as biodiversity loss, plastic pollution, and clean air are sometimes men-
tioned, but far less frequently than climate change.
We identified nine green communities on Twitter, all pertaining to climate change 
– namely, Climate change and hope (CC-Hope), CC-Action, CC-Knowledge, CC-Science, 
CC-Sustainability, CC-Health, CC-Energy, CC-Solutions, and CC-Society. Authors in 
each community posted about different environmental topics, yet some common themes 
emerged. Importantly, climate change and climate action related tweets were commonly 
posted by authors in all green communities, showing that people demand active efforts 
towards a sustainable future from politicians, industries, and businesses. Since data were 
collected in the week of Earth Day, individuals and organisations took to Twitter to cel-
ebrate the occasion and urge more environmental action.
Differences in content also emerged. Depending on the community, shared content 
focused on information dissemination (CC-knowledge), solutions (CC-action and CC-
solutions), or health impacts (CC-health). Some communities shared a more positive out-
look towards a sustainable future (CC-hope) while others focused more on environmental 
threats for society (CC-society). With regards to solutions for the environmental crises, 
some communities advocated for inclusive collective action (CC-hope and CC-science), 


	
Climatic Change (2024) 177:73
1 3
73 
Page 16 of 23
while others focused more on individual actions (CC-health), or technological and indus-
trial innovations (CC-sustainability, CC-energy, and CC-solutions).
4.2  Environmental content on twitter tended to be generally pro‑environmental
Dismissive content constituted a minority of tweets in every green community and was 
encountered mostly in tweets about climate change. We found little evidence of conspirato-
rial content, possibly because we analysed only the top nine communities that contained 
at least 1% of all users in our sample, thereby omitting smaller clusters of users who post 
conspiratorial environmental content.
Another reason for this finding could be that earlier studies focused only on climate 
change which is a more polarising term than other environmental issues (Cody et al. 2015). 
Specifically, studies that focus on climate change exclusively could ‘arguably have polari-
sation “built in” [original emphasis]’ (Pearce et al. 2019, p. 11) by categorising all non-
neutral views as either anti- or pro- climate change. To our knowledge, this study is the first 
to use validated search terms related to the full planetary boundaries framework, thereby 
allowing a broad yet potentially more nuanced collection of environment-related tweets.
At the time of data collection in April 2022, Twitter had been shown to have a nega-
tive effect on conspiracy beliefs (Theocharis et al. 2021) and had taken steps to remove 
conspiratorial content (Mahl et al. 2021). However, since the sale of Twitter in October of 
2022, conspiratorial content and misinformation are expected to increase (Ledford 2022). 
Our results represent a snapshot of Twitter discourse at a specific point in time before its 
sale, and limit conclusions regarding the environment-related sentiment on Twitter since 
its sale. For future research it would be interesting to replicate the current study and to see 
whether different results emerge.
4.3  Green communities discussing varied environmental topics interact with each 
other
Unlike previous studies on climate change related discussions that provide mixed-evidence 
of homophily in Twitter networks (Pearce et al. 2014; Williams et al. 2015), we found that 
users within different green communities followed each other, which could increase expo-
sure to content shared by those in other green communities.
As such, users with environmental concerns may seek out new information about vari-
ous topics and may interact with other users for doing so, as demonstrated in traditional 
media research as well (Ho et al. 2014; van Valkengoed et al. 2022). Future research could 
focus on Twitter network clusters to understand how different communities may interact 
with each other more actively. For instance, we could identify the environmental topics 
that users from different networks agree or disagree on by examining the similarities or dif-
ferences in replies or quote tweets of users within and outside of one’s own network. This 
could facilitate in persuading people to care about other related environmental issues they 
may not engage with otherwise.
4.4  Global North dominates English‑language environmental discourse on Twitter
We found that the environmental content on Twitter mostly originated from the Global 
North. This is concerning because wealthier countries in the Global North are generally 


Climatic Change (2024) 177:73	
1 3
Page 17 of 23 
73
responsible for environmental degradation (for example, because of high carbon emissions) 
while those in the Global South are more endangered by its effects (Kartha et al. 2020). 
Demands for accountability for this disparity have risen recently as omission of voices 
from the Global South limits people’s awareness about the extent of the environmental cri-
ses facing our planet, hindering the urgently needed global effort to counter the challenges 
posed by it (Atwoli et al. 2022; Stoddard et al. 2021).
This inequity also emulates previous findings regarding the lack of geographical diver-
sity in published climate research and environmental communication as well as in media 
coverage of environmental issues (Comfort and Park 2018; Schäfer and Painter 2021; 
Tandon 2021). Combined with previous research, our study affirms that those who are 
most vulnerable to the effects of environmental degradation are inadequately represented 
in global discussions, even with the presumed connectivity and wide reach of social media 
platforms.
Notably, our study considered only English-language tweets, which account for more 
than half of the tweets on Twitter (Hong et al. 2021). Tweets in other popular languages 
such as Indonesian and Spanish (Hong et al. 2021) could add a much-needed nuance to the 
findings concerning disparities in global environmental discourse. At the same time, Eng-
lish remains a popular second language in many countries of the Global South and Twitter 
users from these regions may still tweet in their native language as well as in English (Eleta 
and Golbeck 2014; Mocanu et al. 2013).
4.5  Implications and future directions
Before discussing the implications of our study, some limitations of our study are listed 
to act as a caveat for the interpretation of our findings. First, while Twitter activity cor-
responds to the beliefs people hold, it may not be representative of environmental views of 
the general population as Twitter users tend to be younger, wealthier, and reside in urban 
areas with greater accessibility to internet (Barberá and Rivero 2015; Blank 2017). Sec-
ond, while we used a broad environmental framework to select the search terms for data 
collection, it may not have led to gathering all types of environment-related tweets. Third, 
in community detection using the Louvain algorithm a user can only be assigned to one 
community, making it possible that some users belonging to multiple communities were 
placed in the one where they had the most connections. Finally, while we traced inter-
actions between green communities based on followers, it remains to be determined how 
community members interact with those in a different community, for example, to access 
new information or to criticise the members of other communities.
Despite these limitations, our study provides a thorough overview of environmental dis-
cussions on Twitter with implications for researchers and policymakers. While our study 
revealed discussions about various topics, climate change emerged as the primary envi-
ronmental concern. The popularity of climate change in public discourse is encouraging 
given its devastating consequences, but the need for further communication on the loss of 
biosphere integrity (i.e., biodiversity loss and extinction) and other interlinked threats is 
also warranted so that the public understanding of environmental challenges and solutions 
can advance.
Research on the inclusion of the planetary boundaries framework in environmental 
policy in North America and Europe shows that despite being included in some national 
policy in Europe, it is still overlooked in policy-making at the international scale (Hur-
ley and Tittensor 2020). Similarly, an analysis of tweets by prominent environmental 


	
Climatic Change (2024) 177:73
1 3
73 
Page 18 of 23
non-governmental organisations (eNGOs) revealed increased communication about the 
threats of climate change and plastic pollution whereas other environmental issues were 
rarely discussed (Barrios-O’Neill 2021). Hence, emphasising the environmental thresholds 
of the planetary boundaries framework in environmental policy and advocacy might draw 
public’s attention to the importance of issues other than climate change.
Moreover, individuals may benefit from knowing that their actions impact other more 
tangible planetary boundaries such as biodiversity loss and plastic pollution. Emphasis-
ing that pro-environmental behaviours positively impact not only people’s proximal natu-
ral environments but also their own health could motivate more pro-environmental deci-
sions (Gustafson et al. 2021; Limaye 2021). Thus, future research could explore ways of 
using the wide reach of social media to educate the public about the overall impact of their 
behaviours on the environment.
While there was a relative abundance of pro-environmental tweets in our findings, the 
uncertainty surrounding Twitter’s content moderation practices since its sale and ques-
tions regarding the future of the platform (Nidumolu et al. 2023) highlight the fragility of 
social media ecosystems and the discourse they represent. Researchers have also voiced 
concerns regarding availability of social media data and changes to these platforms previ-
ously, calling for studies integrating various social media platforms and data available on 
them (Ghermandi and Sinclair 2019). We also invite further research into the environmen-
tal discourse on other platforms like Instagram and TikTok, as environmental topics and 
sentiment may differ among social media. Despite this caveat regarding the timeframe of 
our results, our findings still add to the growing literature that dismissive content may only 
form a minority of environmental discourse on social media (Grouverman et al. 2018). 
This might be particularly true for environmental discussions that are not limited to cli-
mate change, which tends to be a more polarising topic on social media (Cody et al. 2015; 
Falkenberg et al. 2022; Fownes et al. 2018). Hence, communication practitioners and poli-
cymakers could focus primarily on persuading and supporting the individuals who want to 
adopt greener lifestyles rather than focusing on the sceptical minority who may not have 
pro-environmental intentions to begin with. That said, it also appears that polarisation on 
social media could depend on which environmental issue is being discussed and where, 
and social media messaging should be tailored to people’s worldviews and contexts (Chang 
et al. 2022a).
Finally, our study echoed the growing acknowledgement of the disparity in the global 
environmental discourse, finding little representation from Global South also in the online 
space (Blicharska et al. 2017; Karlsson 2002). This disparity in who leads the conversation 
about environmental issues limits our understanding of indigenous construal, views, and 
practices about the environment (Fernández-Llamazares et al. 2015; Thaker 2021). Thus, 
while our study considered only English-language tweets based on a broad yet selective list 
of search terms, future studies could conduct similar analyses in multiple languages and 
with different search terms to add novel interpretations of how the environment may be 
construed locally and contextualise such findings to align with ethnographic studies.
5  Conclusion
Across nine green communities on Twitter, we found that climate change was the most 
frequently discussed environmental issue and that there was less focus on the other plan-
etary boundaries. Content that was dismissive of environmental issues formed a minority, 


Climatic Change (2024) 177:73	
1 3
Page 19 of 23 
73
whereas climate action was emphasised in all green communities. The green communi-
ties in our study seemed to interact with each other and we found little evidence of polar-
ised clusters in which people have limited exposure to other information. Finally, we found 
that English language tweets about the environment originated mainly in the Global North, 
indicating that the Twitter space currently remains inadequate for equitable global discus-
sions surrounding environmental issues.
Supplementary Information  The online version contains supplementary material available at https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1007/​s10584-​024-​03729-y.
Acknowledgements  We would like to thank Dr Gerret von Nordheim, Dr Bert Bakker, Dr Judith Möller, Dr 
Rinaldo Kühne, and Dr Anne Kroon for lending their expertise during various stages of this study. Addition-
ally, we thank the first author’s PhD Club members for providing valuable feedback on initial drafts of the 
paper. Finally, we thank the editor and two anonymous reviewers for their contributions in improving the 
quality of our manuscript.
Author contributions  a. Shreya Dubey: Conceptualisation, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, 
Data curation, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Project administration
b. Marijn Meijers: Conceptualisation, Methodology, Validation, Writing - Review & Editing, Supervi-
sion, Funding acquisition
c. Eline Smit: Conceptualisation, Methodology, Writing - Review & Editing, Supervision, Funding 
acquisition
d. Edith Smit: Conceptualisation, Methodology, Writing - Review & Editing, Supervision, Funding 
acquisition
Funding  The research was supported by funding from Amsterdam School of Communication Research 
(ASCoR), University of Amsterdam. The research time of the second author was supported by a Dutch 
Research Council (NWO) grant awarded to the second author [grant number Veni.201S.075].
Data availability  The data and analysis scripts for this study are available on the OSF project page (https://​
osf.​io/​kg43n/).
Declarations 
Competing interests  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly 
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
References
Adam S, Reber U, Häussler T, Schmid-Petri H (2020) How climate change skeptics (try to) spread their 
ideas: Using computational methods to assess the resonance among skeptics’ and legacy media. PLoS 
One 15(10):e0240089. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​pone.​02400​89
Atwoli L, Erhabor GE, Gbakima AA, Haileamlak A, Ntumba J-MK, Kigera J, Laybourn-Langton L, 
Mash B, Muhia J, Mulaudzi FM, Ofori-Adjei D, Okonofua F, Rashidian A, El-Adawy M, Sidibé 
S, Snouber A, Tumwine J, Yassien MS, Yonga P et  al (2022) COP27 climate change conference: 
urgent action needed for africa and the world: wealthy nations must step up support for africa and 


	
Climatic Change (2024) 177:73
1 3
73 
Page 20 of 23
vulnerable countries in addressing past, present and future impacts of climate change. Oxford Open 
Energy:oiac008. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​ooene​rgy/​oiac0​08
Barberá P, Rivero G (2015) Understanding the Political Representativeness of Twitter Users. Soc Sci Com-
put Rev 33(6):712–729. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​08944​39314​558836
Barrie C, Ho JC, Chan C, Rico N, König T, Davidson T (2022) academictwitteR: access the twitter aca-
demic research product track v2 api endpoint (0.3.1) [Computer software]. https://​cran.r-​proje​ct.​org/​
web/​packa​ges/​acade​mictw​itteR/​index.​html
Barrios-O’Neill D (2021) Focus and social contagion of environmental organization advocacy on Twitter. 
Conserv Biol 35(1):307–315. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​cobi.​13564
Blank G (2017) The digital divide among twitter users and its implications for social research. Soc Sci 
Comput Rev 35(6):679–697. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​08944​39316​671698
Blei DM, Ng AY, Jordan MI (2003) Latent Dirichlet Allocation. J Mach Learn Res 3(Jan):993–1022
Blicharska M, Smithers RJ, Kuchler M, Agrawal GK, Gutiérrez JM, Hassanali A, Huq S, Koller SH, 
Marjit S, Mshinda HM, Masjuki HH, Solomons NW, Staden JV, Mikusiński G (2017) Steps to 
overcome the North–South divide in research relevant to climate change policy and practice. Nat 
Clim Change 7(1) Article 1. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​nclim​ate31​63
Blondel VD, Guillaume J-L, Lambiotte R, Lefebvre E (2008) Fast unfolding of communities in large 
networks. J Statis Mech : Theory Exp 2008(10):P10008. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1088/​1742-​5468/​2008/​
10/​P10008
Boulianne S, Lalancette M, Ilkiw D (2020) “School strike 4 climate”: Social media and the international 
youth protest on climate change. Media Commun 8(2) Article 2. https://​doi.​org/​10.​17645/​mac.​v8i2.​
2768
Build for Good: Climate Change (n.d.) Retrieved 15 December 2021, from https://​devel​oper.​twitt​er.​com/​
en/​use-​cases/​build-​for-​good/​extre​me-​weath​er
Cameletti M, Fabris S, Schlosser S, Toninelli D (2022) Dictionary-based classification of tweets about 
environment. J Math Statis Sci 8(1):13–32
Chang CH, Armsworth PR, Masuda YJ (2022a) Environmental discourse exhibits consistency and vari-
ation across spatial scales on twitter. BioScience 72(8):789–797. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​biosci/​
biac0​51
Chang CH, Armsworth PR, Masuda YJ (2022b) Twitter data reveal six distinct environmental personas. 
Front Ecol Environ 20(8):481–487. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​fee.​2510
Chen X, Zou L, Zhao B (2019) Detecting climate change deniers on twitter using a deep neural network. 
In: Proceedings of the 2019 11th International Conference on Machine Learning and Computing - 
ICMLC ’19, pp 204–210. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​33182​99.​33183​82
Cody EM, Reagan AJ, Mitchell L, Dodds PS, Danforth CM (2015) Climate change sentiment on twit-
ter: An unsolicited public opinion poll. PLoS One 10(8):e0136092. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​
pone.​01360​92
Comfort SE, Park YE (2018) On the field of environmental communication: A systematic review of the 
peer-reviewed literature. Environ Commun 12(7):862–875. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​17524​032.​2018.​
15143​15
Csardi G, Nepusz T (2005) The igraph software package for complex network research. InterJ Complex 
Syst 1695
Dwivedi R (2001) Environmental movements in the global south: Issues of livelihood and beyond. Int 
Sociol 16(1):11–31. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​02685​80901​01600​1003
Eckstein D, Vera K, Schäfer L, Germanwatch (2021) Global climate risk index 2021 who suffers most 
extreme weather events? Weather-related loss events in 2019 and 2000-2019.
Eleta I, Golbeck J (2014) Multilingual use of twitter: Social networks at the language frontier. Comput 
Hum Behav 41:424–432. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​chb.​2014.​05.​005
Enders AM, Uscinski JE, Seelig MI, Klofstad CA, Wuchty S, Funchion JR, Murthi MN, Premaratne K, 
Stoler J (2021) The relationship between social media use and beliefs in conspiracy theories and 
misinformation. Polit Behav. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11109-​021-​09734-6
Falkenberg M, Galeazzi A, Torricelli M, Di Marco N, Larosa F, Sas M, Mekacher A, Pearce W, Zollo 
F, Quattrociocchi W, Baronchelli A (2022) Growing polarization around climate change on social 
media. Nat Clim Chang 12(12) Article 12. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​s41558-​022-​01527-x
Feinerer I, Hornik K, Meyer D (2008) Text mining infrastructure in R. J Stat Softw 25:1–54. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​18637/​jss.​v025.​i05
Fellows, I. (2018). wordcloud: Word clouds (2.6) [Computer software]. https://​CRAN.R-​proje​ct.​org/​
packa​ge=​wordc​loud


Climatic Change (2024) 177:73	
1 3
Page 21 of 23 
73
Fernández-Llamazares Á, Méndez-López ME, Díaz-Reviriego I, McBride MF, Pyhälä A, Rosell-Melé A, 
Reyes-García V (2015) Links between media communication and local perceptions of climate change 
in an indigenous society. Clim Chang 131(2):307–320. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10584-​015-​1381-7
Fownes JR, Yu C, Margolin DB (2018) Twitter and climate change. Sociol Compass 12(6):e12587. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​soc4.​12587
Gasparetti F, Sansonetti G, Micarelli A (2021) Community detection in social recommender systems: A 
survey. Appl Intell 51(6):3975–3995. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10489-​020-​01962-3
Gaytan Camarillo M, Ferguson E, Ljevar V, Spence A (2021) Big Changes Start With Small Talk: Twit-
ter and Climate Change in Times of Coronavirus Pandemic. Front Psychol 12:2308. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​3389/​fpsyg.​2021.​661395
Ghermandi A, Langemeyer J, Van Berkel D, Calcagni F, Depietri Y, Egarter Vigl L, Fox N, Havinga I, Jäger 
H, Kaiser N, Karasov O, McPhearson T, Podschun S, Ruiz-Frau A, Sinclair M, Venohr M, Wood SA 
(2023) Social media data for environmental sustainability: A critical review of opportunities, threats, 
and ethical use. One Earth 6(3):236–250. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​oneear.​2023.​02.​008
Ghermandi A, Sinclair M (2019) Passive crowdsourcing of social media in environmental research: A sys-
tematic map. Glob Environ Chang 55:36–47. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​gloen​vcha.​2019.​02.​003
Grömping M (2014) ‘Echo Chambers’: Partisan facebook groups during the 2014 thai election. Asia Pacific 
Media Educator 24(1):39–59. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​13263​65X14​539185
Grouverman A, Barash V, Kollanyi B, Lederer T, Howard P (2018) Climate change consensus and skepti-
cism: Mapping climate change dialogue on twitter and facebook [Comprop Data Memo]. Oxford Inter-
net Institute https://​compr​op.​oii.​ox.​ac.​uk/​resea​rch/​clima​te-​change/
Grün B, Hornik K (2011) topicmodels: An R package for fitting topic models. J Stat Softw 40:1–30. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​18637/​jss.​v040.​i13
Gustafson A, Pace A, Singh S, Goldberg MH (2021) What do people say is the most important reason to 
protect nature: An analysis of pro-environmental motives across 11 countries. PsyArXiv. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​31234/​osf.​io/​k2z6c
Ho SS, Detenber BH, Rosenthal S, Lee EWJ (2014) Seeking information about climate change: Effects 
of media use in an extended prism. Sci Commun 36(3):270–295. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​10755​47013​
520238
Hong L, Convertino G, Chi E (2021) Language matters in twitter: A large scale study. Proc Int AAAI Conf 
Web Soc Media 5(1):518–521. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1609/​icwsm.​v5i1.​14184
Huang B, Carley KM (2019) A large-scale empirical study of geotagging behavior on Twitter. In: Proceed-
ings of the 2019 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and 
Mining, pp 365–373. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​33411​61.​33428​70
Hurley I, Tittensor DP (2020) The uptake of the biosphere integrity planetary boundary concept into 
national and international environmental policy. Global Ecol Conserv 22:e01029. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1016/j.​gecco.​2020.​e01029
Jang SM, Hart PS (2015) Polarized frames on “climate change” and “global warming” across countries and 
states: Evidence from Twitter big data. Glob Environ Chang 32:11–17. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​gloen​
vcha.​2015.​02.​010
Jovchelovitch S (1995) Social Representations in and of the Public Sphere: Towards a Theoretical Articula-
tion. J Theory Soc Behav 25(1):81–102. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/j.​1468-​5914.​1995.​tb002​67.x
Karami A, Kadari RR, Panati L, Nooli SP, Bheemreddy H, Bozorgi P (2021) Analysis of geotagging behav-
ior: Do geotagged users represent the twitter population? ISPRS Int J Geo-Inform, Article 10, 6(6). 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​ijgi1​00603​73
Karlsson S (2002) The North-South knowledge divide: Consequences for global environmental governance. 
In: Esty DC (ed) Global environmental governance: Options & opportunities. Yale School of Forestry 
& Environmental Studies
Kartha, S., Kemp-Benedict, E., Ghosh, E., Nazareth, A., & Gore, T. (2020). The carbon inequality era: An 
assessment of the global distribution of consumption emissions among individuals from 1990 to 2015 
and beyond. Oxfam, Stockholm Environment Institute 10.21201/2020.6492
Kazansky B, Karak M, Perosa T, Tsui Q, Baker S, The Engine Room (2022) At the confluence of digi-
tal rights and climate & environmental justice: A landscape review. https://​www.​fordf​ounda​tion.​org/​
media/​7356/​ter-​final-​report-​07-​07-​22.​pdf
Kirilenko AP, Stepchenkova SO (2014) Public microblogging on climate change: One year of Twitter 
worldwide. Glob Environ Chang 26:171–182. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​gloen​vcha.​2014.​02.​008
Lacy S, Watson BR, Riffe D, Lovejoy J (2015) Issues and best practices in content analysis. J Mass Com-
mun Q 92(4):791–811. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​10776​99015​607338


	
Climatic Change (2024) 177:73
1 3
73 
Page 22 of 23
Ledford H (2022) Internet and extremism experts predict more hate speech and conspiracy theories on 
Musk’s Twitter. Sci Am https://​www.​scien​tific​ameri​can.​com/​artic​le/​inter​net-​and-​extre​mism-​exper​ts-​
predi​ct-​more-​hate-​speech-​and-​consp​iracy-​theor​ies-​on-​musks-​twitt​er/
Limaye VS (2021) Making the climate crisis personal through a focus on human health. Clim Chang 
166(3):43. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10584-​021-​03107-y
Liu JC-E, Zhao B (2017) Who speaks for climate change in China? Evidence from Weibo Climatic Change 
140(3):413–422. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10584-​016-​1883-y
Lutkenhaus RO, Jansz J, Bouman MPA (2019) Mapping the Dutch vaccination debate on Twitter: Identi-
fying communities, narratives, and interactions. Vaccine X, 1:100019. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jvacx.​
2019.​100019
Mahl D, von Nordheim G, Guenther L (2022) Noise pollution: A multi-step approach to assessing the con-
sequences of (not) validating search terms on automated content analyses. Digit J:1–23. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1080/​21670​811.​2022.​21149​20
Mahl D, Zeng J, Schäfer MS (2021) From “Nasa Lies” to “Reptilian Eyes”: Mapping communication about 
10 conspiracy theories, their communities, and main propagators on twitter. Soc Media Soc 7(2) 
20563051211017482. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​20563​05121​10174​82
Maier D, Waldherr A, Miltner P, Wiedemann G, Niekler A, Keinert A, Pfetsch B, Heyer G, Reber U, Häu-
ssler T, Schmid-Petri H, Adam S (2018) Applying LDA topic modeling in communication research: 
Toward a valid and reliable methodology. Commun Methods Meas 12(2–3):93–118. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1080/​19312​458.​2018.​14307​54
Mocanu D, Baronchelli A, Perra N, Gonçalves B, Zhang Q, Vespignani A (2013) The Twitter of babel: 
Mapping world languages through microblogging platforms. PLoS One 8(4):e61981. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1371/​journ​al.​pone.​00619​81
Morrow DR, Thompson MS, Anderson A, Batres M, Buck HJ, Dooley K, Geden O, Ghosh A, Low S, 
Njamnshi A, Noël J, Táíwò OO, Talati S, Wilcox J (2020) Principles for thinking about carbon dioxide 
removal in just climate policy. One Earth 3(2):150–153. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​oneear.​2020.​07.​015
Mukerjee S (2021) A systematic comparison of community detection algorithms for measuring selective 
exposure in co-exposure networks. Sci Rep 11(1):15218. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​s41598-​021-​94724-1
Nidumolu J, Hu K, Hu K (2023) Elon Musk says Twitter’s cash flow still negative as ad revenue drops 50%. 
Reuters https://​www.​reute​rs.​com/​techn​ology/​elon-​musk-​says-​twitt​ers-​cash-​flow-​still-​negat​ive-​ad-​reven​
ue-​drops-​2023-​07-​15/
Nikita, M., & Chaney, N. (2020). ldatuning: Tuning of the latent dirichlet allocation models parameters 
(1.0.2) [Computer software]. https://​CRAN.R-​proje​ct.​org/​packa​ge=​ldatu​ning
Pearce W, Holmberg K, Hellsten I, Nerlich B (2014) Climate change on twitter: Topics, communities and 
conversations about the 2013 ipcc working group 1 report. PLoS One 9(4):e94785. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1371/​journ​al.​pone.​00947​85
Pearce W, Niederer S, Özkula SM, Sánchez Querubín N (2019) The social media life of climate change: 
Platforms, publics, and future imaginaries. WIREs Clim Chang 10(2). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​wcc.​569
Pilař L, Kvasničková Stanislavská L, Pitrová J, Krejčí I, Tichá I, Chalupová M (2019) Twitter analysis of 
global communication in the field of sustainability. Sustainability 11(24):6958. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
3390/​su112​46958
R Core Team (2021) R: A language and environment for statistical computing. [Computer software]. R 
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria https://​www.R-​proje​ct.​org/
Richardson K, Steffen W, Lucht W, Bendtsen J, Cornell SE, Donges JF, Drüke M, Fetzer I, Bala G, von 
Bloh W, Feulner G, Fiedler S, Gerten D, Gleeson T, Hofmann M, Huiskamp W, Kummu M, Mohan C, 
Nogués-Bravo D et al (2023) Earth beyond six of nine planetary boundaries. Sci Adv 9(37):eadh2458. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1126/​sciadv.​adh24​58
Rockström J, Steffen W, Noone K, Persson Å, Chapin FS, Lambin E, Lenton TM, Scheffer M, Folke C, 
Schellnhuber HJ, Nykvist B, de Wit CA, Hughes T, van der Leeuw S, Rodhe H, Sörlin S, Snyder 
PK, Costanza R, Svedin U et al (2009) Planetary boundaries: Exploring the safe operating space for 
humanity. Ecol Soc 14(2) https://​www.​jstor.​org/​stable/​26268​316
Sachan M, Contractor D, Faruquie TA, Subramaniam LV (2012) Using content and interactions for discov-
ering communities in social networks. In: Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on World 
Wide Web, pp 331–340. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​21878​36.​21878​82
Sarrica M, Farinosi M, Comunello F, Brondi S, Parisi L, Fortunati L (2018) Shaken and stirred: Social 
representations, social media, and community empowerment in emergency contexts. Semiotica 
2018(222):321–346. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1515/​sem-​2016-​0208
Schäfer MS, Painter J (2021) Climate journalism in a changing media ecosystem: Assessing the production 
of climate change-related news around the world. WIREs Clim Chang 12(1):e675. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1002/​wcc.​675


Climatic Change (2024) 177:73	
1 3
Page 23 of 23 
73
Segerberg A, Bennett WL (2011) Social media and the organization of collective action: Using twitter to 
explore the ecologies of two climate change protests. Commun Rev 14(3):197–215. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1080/​10714​421.​2011.​597250
Stoddard I, Anderson K, Capstick S, Carton W, Depledge J, Facer K, Gough C, Hache F, Hoolohan C, 
Hultman M, Hällström N, Kartha S, Klinsky S, Kuchler M, Lövbrand E, Nasiritousi N, Newell P, 
Peters GP, Sokona Y et al (2021) Three decades of climate mitigation: Why haven’t we bent the global 
emissions curve? Annu Rev Environ Resour 46(1):653–689. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1146/​annur​ev-​envir​
on-​012220-​011104
Stryker J, Wray R, Hornik R, Yanovitzky I (2006) Validation of database search terms for content analy-
sis: The case of cancer news coverage. J Mass Commun Q 83:413–430. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​10776​
99006​08300​212
Takikawa H, Nagayoshi K (2017) Political polarization in social media: Analysis of the “Twitter politi-
cal field” in Japan. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), pp 3143–3150. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​BigDa​ta.​2017.​82582​91
Tandon A (2021) Analysis: The lack of diversity in climate-science research. Carbon Brief https://​www.​
carbo​nbrief.​org/​analy​sis-​the-​lack-​of-​diver​sity-​in-​clima​te-​scien​ce-​resea​rch/
Terren L, Borge-Bravo R (2021) Echo chambers on social media: A systematic review of the literature. Rev 
Commun Res 9:99–118
Thaker J (2021) Environmentalism of the Poor: Global south perspectives on environmental communica-
tion. In: The Handbook of International Trends in Environmental Communication. Routledge
Theocharis Y, Cardenal A, Jin S, Aalberg T, Hopmann DN, Strömbäck J, Castro L, Esser F, Van Aelst P, 
de Vreese C, Corbu N, Koc-Michalska K, Matthes J, Schemer C, Sheafer T, Splendore S, Stanyer 
J, Stępińska A, Štětka V (2021) Does the platform matter? Social media and COVID-19 conspiracy 
theory beliefs in 17 countries. New Media Soc, 14614448211045666. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​14614​
44821​10456​66
van Valkengoed AM, Perlaviciute G, Steg L (2022) Relationships between climate change perceptions and 
climate adaptation actions: Policy support, information seeking, and behaviour. Clim Chang 171(1):14. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10584-​022-​03338-7
von Nordheim G, Boczek K, Koppers L (2018) Sourcing the sources: An analysis of the use of Twitter and 
Facebook as a journalistic source over 10 years in The New York Times , The Guardian , and Süd-
deutsche Zeitung. Digit J 6(7):807–828. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​21670​811.​2018.​14906​58
Vu HT, Do HV, Seo H, Liu Y (2020) Who leads the conversation on climate change?: A study of a global 
network of NGOs on twitter. Environ Commun 14(4):450–464. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​17524​032.​
2019.​16870​99
Williams HTP, McMurray JR, Kurz T, Hugo Lambert F (2015) Network analysis reveals open forums 
and echo chambers in social media discussions of climate change. Glob Environ Chang 32:126–138. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​gloen​vcha.​2015.​03.​006
Yin Z, Hu Y, Jenkins K, He Y, Forstenhäusler N, Warren R, Yang L, Jenkins R, Guan D (2021) Assessing 
the economic impacts of future fluvial flooding in six countries under climate change and socio-eco-
nomic development. Clim Chang 166(3):38. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10584-​021-​03059-3
Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
