On Presenters and Commenters in YouTube Climate Change Videos 
Vered Aharonson1,2 and Jared Joselowitz1,3 
1School of Electrical and Information Engineering, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, 
South Africa 
2School of Sciences, University of Central Lancashire, Pyla, Cyprus 
3Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial College, London, UK  
Vered.aharonson@wits.ac.za 
jared.joselowitz23@imperial.ac.uk  
Abstract: Social media videos can promote viewers responsibility to solve social problems such as climate change. Not all 
aspiring videos, however, are successful in persuading their viewers on the perils involved in climate change and on the need 
for pro-environmental behaviour. Our study examined attributes that could explain a video’s persuasiveness and focused on 
the video presenter traits. Videos on climate change were sourced from YouTube conjointly with the comments they elicited. 
The presenters in these videos addressed the negative effects and dangers of climate change and the role of human activity 
in resolving them. Two attributes were manually coded for each video: the type of presenter in the videos– scientist, 
politician or celebrity, and their presentation style: blaming, stating the problem, or suggesting a solution. A measure of 
persuasiveness was computed from the YouTubers comments using sentiment analysis. This computation provided a polarity 
label – positive, negative, or neutral, for all comments, for each video. Subsets of 50 comments per video were manually 
coded to validate the computational analysis. The findings indicated that a predominant number of positive-polarity 
comments was elicited by video presenters who were scientists. Videos that proposed potential solutions to climate change 
elicited a majority of positive polarity. Politicians and celebrity presenters, as well as blame-oriented videos elicited a larger 
number of negative-polarity comments. These initial findings imply a potential of sentiment analysis of comments to 
elucidate which attributes can increase a video’s persuasiveness on its viewers. This insight can improve future video 
production and enhance their influence. 
Keywords: Netnography, Persuasiveness, YouTube videos, Climate change, Text analytics 
1. Introduction  
Social media are often harnessed to promote responsible conduct in support of global social initiatives. As focal 
point where communities access and interact with information, social media platforms have the potential to 
nurture behavioural changes on a large scale (Park et al., 2014). By the same token these platforms could be 
used to study and assess the persuasiveness of the information provided on large populations through social 
network analysis (SNA). These methods can provide online data and deeper insights into consumers' opinions, 
motives, and concerns, while facilitating an ethical access to social media community members (Fenton and 
Procter, 2019). The original use of these methods for marketing purposing was sparsely extended to the 
promotion of social causes and human betterment (Kanter and Fine, 2010). 
Netnography is an SNA method that adapts ethnography to the study of online communities (Kozinets, 2017). 
In a preliminary study, we employed netnography to evaluate the engagement of social media users with online 
information on safe behaviour during the COVID-19 pandemic (Aharonson et al., 2022). A set of Youtube video 
interviews that adressed this topic were evaluated in terms of persuasiveness. Netnography was employed to 
computationally construct a persuasiveness index from the YouTubers “like” and “dislike” counts. Hypothesising 
that the persuasiveness is substantially governed by the vocal traits of the presenter (Aharonson et al. 2021), 
the study focused on acoustic attributes in the speakers’ voice, and implied that cepstral attributes can predict 
the netnographic persuasiveness (Aharonson et al., 2022). 
This feasibility study had, however, three limitations. First, although the persuasiveness measure of like-to-
dislike ratio was shown to provide quantitative metrics for the interactions that viewers and users have with 
video content (Broekens and Brinkman, 2009, Sui et al. 2022), it does not consider the textual content of the 
comment. Moreover, practically, since YouTube how hides the number of dislikes for its videos, this measure 
cannot be readily applied. The second limitation was the focus on acoustic properties, while organic component 
of the presenters’ speech such as textual attributes can further explain the persuasiveness measure. The identity 
and role of the presenting person, i.e. politician or scientist, may correspondingly have fundamental impact on 
the community reaction (Malecki et al., 2021). Lastly, the previous study focused on a South African news 
network YouTube channel and its YouTubers’ reactions. 
The present study extends the former one to address the three limitations. The analysis extended the 
persuasiveness index beyond the community’s reactions of “likes” and “dislikes”. Natural language 
9 
Proceedings of the 11th European Conference on Social Media , ECSM 2024


Vered Aharonson and Jared Joselowitz 
understanding methods were employed to extract textual attributes from comments written by the viewers for 
the persuasiveness index. The study of the presenters’ delivery attributes was extended by comparing 
persuasiveness across three types of presenters, and three types of information delivery styles. Lastly, the videos 
in the present study were sourced from the global YouTube channel and the netnographic analysis performed 
on an international community. 
Due to an augmented public interest, the present study reverts the analysis to another pertinent global issue – 
climate change. Social media videos and their communities’ reactions on this topic are prolific and long standing. 
Fundamentally, this topic resembles the COVID-19 one by being universal, and spreading out beyond specific 
social groups and nations. Both topics entail controversy and elements of fear and blame, as social media users 
cannot ascertain the scientific information provided by the presenters. Still, in both cases there is a consensus 
that simple behavioural changes, can potentially do good and make a difference. Video presenters thus need to 
employ their presentation skills and persuade the viewers of the need for and importance of behaviour change. 
Systematic SNA can facilitate and improve these presentation skills. 
2. Methods  
2.1 Dataset Collection  
The dataset included YouTube videos, from which presenters’ attributes were extracted, and the comments 
posted under the videos, that served to compute a netnographic community reaction. A list of 200 videos 
returned when using the keyword “climate change” in YouTube’s search engine were sourced. The viewers’ 
comments of each video were scraped using an open-source Python script. The list of 200 videos was sorted by 
the video number of views using the platform’s sorting tool. The database videos were selected from this list 
based on two criteria: The video had to have at least 200 comments/replies, and at least 90% of the video’s 
comments were in English. A manual selection process was employed to apply an additional criterion – 
controversial and anti-environmental behavior videos were discarded.  
The 150 most popular comments of each video were selected for the dataset. The popularity selection criteria 
was based on YouTube’s ‘'Top comments” sorting function, which considered likes/dislikes, the date the 
comment was posted, and the number of replies that the particular comment received (Feng and Chen, 2022). 
Each comment’s text data was tagged by the video it was posted under. Data privacy was considered in 
discarding the identity of the video publisher and personal details of the comment writers from the analysis. 
2.2 Videos Attributes Selection 
Two presenters’ attributes were chosen for the analysis and were manually coded: the role of the presenter and 
the presentation style. Three categories of presenters were observed in the videos and were manually coded: 
politicians, high-profile public figure (‘celebrities’) such as business leaders, artists or social media personalities, 
and scientists. Similarly, three categories of presentation styles were coded: Videos explicitly blaming an entity, 
such as political party or country, in the problem, videos suggesting solutions to the problem, and videos stating 
the effects of climate change. 
2.3 Comments Text Analysis  
Sentiment analysis was employed on the comments’ text using Python’s TextBlob package (Loria, 2018). 
Negative, neutral, or positive sentiment labels were computed for each comment, based on a list of positive and 
negative words and their semantic orientation. The automated analysis was validated by a human manual coding 
of 50 randomly chosen comments for each video. A comment was coded as “positive” if its content was in 
agreement with the negative effects and dangers of climate change and/or expressed the need to change human 
behaviour. A comment was coded as “negative” if it disagreed with climate change or its effects and/or the need 
to change human behaviour. A “neutral” label was assigned to comments which did not address the topic of 
climate change, or did not express neither a positive nor negative stance on the on whether climate change is 
real and/or on the need to change human behaviour. The congruence between the computerized polarity and 
the manually coded one was evaluated using Cohen’s kappa. 
2.4 Video Persuasiveness Labelling  
The sentiments polarity extracted from the comments served as proxy for the construction of a persuasiveness 
label for each video. A video was labeled persuasive if the majority count of its comments were positive, and 
non-persuasive otherwise. The labels resulted from the manual coding and those computed using sentiment 
analysis were then compared using Cohen’s kappa. 
10 
Proceedings of the 11th European Conference on Social Media , ECSM 2024


Vered Aharonson and Jared Joselowitz 
 
The relations between the video presenters’ attributes and their persuasiveness labels were computed using 
the frequency of each attribute among the two video-label classes – persuasive or non-persuasive. 
3. Results 
The video selection yielded a dataset of 129 videos.  
Cohen’s kappa for the agreement between the automated and manual rating of polarity in individual comments 
was 0.63. The labels of persuasive and non-persuasive videos based on the majority count of positive and 
negative polarity of their comments, yielded an agreement of 0.78. Sixty-five videos had a majority count of 
positive-polarity comments and 57 had a majority count of negative-polarity comments. Seven videos had equal 
quantity of positive and negative polarities, or a majority count of neutral polarity and were omitted from the 
analysis. 
The presenter-attributes frequencies among the persuasive and non-persuasive videos are portrayed in figures 
1 and 2, for the presenter role and presenter text style, respectively. 
 
Figure 1: Frequencies of the presenter types in persuasive and non-persuasive videos 
 
Figure 2: Frequencies of the narrative style types in persuasive and non-persuasive videos 
4. Discussion and Conclusions 
This study provides a proof of concept for the identification of persuasive and non-persuasive videos on climate 
change, based on two of their presenters’ attributes. Extensive previous research applied social media analysis 
to extract presenters’ attributes in the context of marketing. Our studies follow a growing trend and strive to 
harness this analysis for promoting responsible behaviour in pertinent global challenges. Whereas most studies 
involved human participants, and employ either qualitative analysis, or manual coding schemes (Fenton and 
Procter, 2019), our studies aim to automate this analysis and enable a quantitative view of the entire social 
media communities’ reactions, which could both expedite and improve the analysis. The present study follows 
our previous ones in elucidating computational measures of persuasiveness based on YouTubers’ comments on 
11 
Proceedings of the 11th European Conference on Social Media , ECSM 2024


Vered Aharonson and Jared Joselowitz 
videos, and the attributes of the videos that contribute to this persuasiveness. The comments polarity, extracted 
through automated sentiment analysis, yielded a kappa reliability coefficient of 0.63 to the human rating of this 
polarity. This may result from the fact that the manual coding entailed inference of attitudes from the text, which 
the preliminary sentiment analysis did not consider. A more comprehensive textual analysis of the individual 
comments can be applied to test this hypothesis. On the other hand, the persuasiveness label of the videos, 
based on a majority of positive sentiments amongst its comments, yielded a larger agreement of 0.78 between 
automated and manual coding. This may be explained by the summative nature of this label that overcomes the 
inner, per-comment, rating disagreement and reflected the overall reaction of the video’s viewers’ community. 
Our preliminary analysis indicate that scientists are more persuasive presenters, and that politicians or other 
high-profile public figures (“celebrities”) are the least persuasive presenters in climate change videos. This 
implies that viewers may trust scientists more than politicians or celebrities and that scientists are most 
persuasive presenters in eliciting discussions for taking actions to deal with the climate change problem. This 
finding is in line with literature showing that scientists are perceived as more trustworthy compared to politicians 
(Hendriks et al., 2022; Reif et al., 2020, Jin et. al, 2020). The analysis of the video content attribute indicates that 
videos containing direct blame and quoting the fault in political party, groups or nations, are not persuasive. 
Videos that contain suggestions and possible solutions to combat climate change were found as more persuasive 
than videos that only state the effects of climate change rather than providing solutions to help combat the 
problem. 
The full potential of the method proposed in the study, needs to be extended to a plethora of additional 
persuasive video attributes. This goal, however, necessitates a larger videos dataset. The potential of the 
methods should be extended to other video platforms such as TikTok to investigate possible platform 
differences.  
Although preliminary, these results offer additional insight into the mechanisms behind online persuasion, 
within the important context of pro-environmental behaviour. These preliminary findings can channel the future 
creation of persuasive social-media videos and expand their influence capabilities. 
Acknowledgment 
The project has received funding from the EU-funded Erasmus+ program "BtheChange" under grant agreement 
2022-1-SE01-KA220-HED-000087275. 
References 
Aharonson, V., Cocker, B., Buisson-Street, K., and Winter, D. (2021) Modelling a Good Delivery of Bad News. In 2021 IEEE 
9th International Conference on Healthcare Informatics,  pp 224-227. 
Aharonson, V. Karpasitis, C. Weinstein, T. (2022) Netnography of Social Media Addresses on COVID-19. European 
Conference on Social Media, pp 1-6. 
Broekens, J. and Brinkman, W.-P. (2009) Affectbutton: Towards a standard for dynamic affective user feedback.  3rd 
international conference on affective computing and intelligent interaction and workshops, pp 1-8. 
Fenton, A. and Procter, C. (2019) Studying social media communities: blending methods with netnography. SAGE Research 
Methods Cases. 
Hendriks, F. Janssen, I. and Jucks, R. (2023) Balance as Credibility? How Presenting One-vs. Two-Sided Messages Affects 
Ratings of Scientists’ and Politicians’ Trustworthiness. Health communication Vol. 38 No. 12, pp.2757-2764. 
Jin, J. Lam, S. Savas, O. and McCulloh, I. (2020) Approaches for quantifying video prominence, narratives, & discussion: 
engagement on COVID-19 related YouTube Videos. Proc. IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social 
Networks Analysis and Mining pp 811-818. 
Kanter, B. & Fine, A. (2010) The networked nonprofit: Connecting with social media to drive change, John Wiley & Sons. 
Kozinets, R. (2017) Netnography: Radical participative understanding for a networked communications society. The SAGE 
handbook of qualitative research in psychology, 374. 
Loria, S., 2018. textblob Documentation. Release 0.15, [online] 
https://buildmedia.readthedocs.org/media/pdf/textblob/latest/textblob.pdf. 
Malecki, K.M., Keating, J.A. and Safdar, N. (2021) Crisis communication and public perception of COVID-19 risk in the era of 
social media. Clinical Infectious Diseases, Vol. 72, pp 697-702. 
Park, S. Shim, H.S. Chatterjee, M. Sagae, K. and Morency, L. P. (2014) Computational analysis of persuasiveness in social 
multimedia: A novel dataset and multimodal prediction approach.  Proceedings of the 16th International Conference 
on Multimodal Interaction, pp 50-57. 
Reif A, Kneisel T. Schäfer M. and Taddicken, M. (2020) Why are scientific experts perceived as trustworthy? Emotional 
assessment within TV and YouTube videos. Media and Communication Vol. 8 No. 1 pp 191-205. 
Sui, W. Sui, A. and Rhodes, R.E. (2022) What to watch: Practical considerations and strategies for using YouTube for 
research. Digital Health Vol. 8, pp 1-13. 
12 
Proceedings of the 11th European Conference on Social Media , ECSM 2024
