Vol.:(0123456789)
Social Network Analysis and Mining (2024) 14:10 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13278-023-01175-9
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Shaping climate change discourse: the nexus between political media 
landscape and recommendation systems in social networks
Yousef Sakieh1 
Received: 14 March 2023 / Revised: 2 September 2023 / Accepted: 24 November 2023 / Published online: 14 December 2023 
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
Recommendation systems have become ubiquitous, and they actively participate in creating our individual and collective 
identity. In this paper, the diffusion of climate change information has been studied based on YouTube’s recommendation 
system and the political media landscape. The YouTube channels of CNN, BBC News and Fox News, as the most popular 
channels, respectively, for Left, Center and Right parties, were explored using web scraping and social network analysis 
to check what kind of recommended content will pop up if a user looks for climate change videos. Using an agent-based 
modeling approach, the competition between Left, Center and Right media in pushing their own narrative of climate change 
in society was simulated. The results suggest YouTube’s recommendation algorithm is highly biased since most of the 
recommended content was from the same channel fitting their own political agenda. The agent-based modeling indicates 
the size of a network is a decisive factor in further spread of a message as Left media always dominated Center and Right 
media in pushing their own perspective on climate change regardless of higher weights assigned to Right media. This study 
shed light on how public perception on climate change can be shaped by recommendation systems and digital companies.
Keywords  Recommendation systems · Social networks · YouTube · Climate change · CNN · Fox news
1  Introduction
1.1  Contextual framework
Recommendation systems have become ubiquitous. In the 
age of artificial intelligence and social media, the contempo-
rary humans live in a digital matrix, where recommendation 
systems have the authority to tell them what movie to watch, 
what person to meet, what restaurant to go and what news 
to read and they have been integrated in almost every aspect 
our lives. Companies and digital businesses rely on recom-
mendation systems to increase their profit, and we as users 
rely on them as they reduce information overload and make 
our lives easier. They boost potential online engagement, 
reduce customers churn, maximize user activity on different 
platforms and increase sales and market share. Recommen-
dation systems offer mutual benefits to producers and con-
sumers. They optimize micro- and macro-customer targeting 
and improve key performance indicators on customers. They 
actively participate in creating our individual and collective 
tastes, and in the long run, they participate in shaping our 
identity with important ethical implications (Milano et al. 
2020, 2021).
Recommendation algorithms have far-reaching impacts 
on society, and understanding these effects is crucial for 
various reasons. Firstly, they can inadvertently contribute 
to the creation of information bubbles and filter bubbles. 
These algorithms prioritize content similar to users’ previ-
ous engagements, potentially reinforcing biases and limiting 
exposure to diverse viewpoints. Additionally, recommenda-
tion algorithms filter out content that does not align with a 
user’s interests, narrowing perspectives and hindering expo-
sure to dissenting viewpoints, which is vital for fostering a 
more informed and open society.
Secondly, privacy concerns arise as recommendation 
algorithms rely on user data for personalization. The col-
lection and analysis of personal information can lead to pri-
vacy breaches. The study of recommendation algorithms is 
essential to assess the ethical implications of data collection 
and usage, ensuring that user privacy is respected. Moreo-
ver, these algorithms significantly impact monetization and 
 *	 Yousef Sakieh 
	
yousef.sakieh@helsinki.fi
1	
Faculty of Biological and Environmental Sciences, 
University of Helsinki, 00014 Helsinki, Finland


	
Social Network Analysis and Mining (2024) 14:10
10 
Page 2 of 15
advertising on digital platforms, affecting advertising effec-
tiveness, user behavior and the revenue models of digital 
companies. Understanding these impacts is vital for both 
businesses and consumers. Furthermore, recommendation 
algorithms have behavioral influences, suggesting products, 
content or actions to users. These influences can be used for 
positive purposes but also for manipulation or harm, making 
it essential to study the mechanisms behind these behavio-
ral effects and promote responsible technology use. Lastly, 
recommendation algorithms play a critical role in promot-
ing or hindering fairness and equity by shaping the content 
users see. Biases in these algorithms can perpetuate societal 
inequalities, necessitating research and policymaking efforts 
to address algorithmic bias and ensure equitable access to 
opportunities and resources. Additionally, studying recom-
mendation algorithms enhances transparency and account-
ability, shedding light on the often opaque and proprietary 
algorithms used by tech companies, allowing users to make 
more informed choices. Policymakers require a deep under-
standing of these algorithms to craft effective regulations 
that balance innovation with societal well-being, highlight-
ing the importance of comprehensive research in this field.
1.2  Literature review
Recommendation systems use and process the digital foot-
print of millions of users mainly to retrieve and exploit their 
cognitive biases, and therefore, they can personalize their 
recommendations and deeply hit their users. For example, 
Youyou et al. (2015) demonstrated that Facebook likes can 
accurately predict users’ sensitive information such as sexual 
orientation, political views, personality traits, use of addic-
tive substances, personal separation and religious belief. In 
this case, they reported with 200–300 likes on Facebook, 
and the artificial intelligence behind the recommendation 
algorithm in this platform can predict users’ personality 
traits better than their family members or even better than 
themselves. As algorithms become smarter and computa-
tionally more complex, they need even less input data to 
predict users’ information. For example, Kosinski (2021) 
demonstrated that artificial intelligence can predict a per-
son’s political orientation only by their facial images with 
accuracy up to 72%, which was found to be higher than accu-
racy of judgments made by humans.
There are many societal implications with such smart and 
powerful algorithms. For example, recommendation systems 
can affect and control public participation in political affairs 
(Feezell et al. 2021). In this context, digital manipulation 
of democratic elections is a very important implication of 
recommendation systems in the realm of politics. Epstein 
and Robertson (2015) studied that voters’ choices are sig-
nificantly influenced by internet search rankings, mostly 
because they trust and favor higher-ranked results over those 
that are rated lower. In this study, researchers investigated 
whether search results could be manipulated to change the 
preferences of unsure voters in democratic elections given 
their apparent authority. According to their findings, biased 
search rankings can change the voting preferences of unsure 
voters from 20 to 80%, while a democratic election is won 
on average with a margin of 7%. Due to such serious and 
important impacts, digital companies have always been an 
attractive target for lobbying groups (Kreiss et al. 2018).
Based on such social implications, recommendation sys-
tems have a critical role in propagation of information in 
society, which can lead to indoctrination and mass customi-
zation of people. There are different underlying variables 
that affect the mechanism through which a message can 
propagate in a network. For example, the global structure of 
the network itself has been cited as a decisive factor shaping 
the diffusion of a message. In this case, Watts and Dodds 
(2007) used a series of computer simulations and interper-
sonal influence processes and they found that diffusion of 
a message over large cascades is not driven by influential 
people but by a large body of easily influenced individu-
als. Bakshy et al. (2011) further tested this hypothesis by 
investigating the attributes and relative influence of 1.6 
million twitter users and tracking 74 million diffusion pat-
terns that happened during a two-month time interval. They 
challenged the conventional assumption about celebrities’ 
central role in the formation of public opinion. They found 
that only two variables of celebrities, namely number of fol-
lowers and past influence, are significant to predict whether 
a celebrity’s tweet can go viral, and the prediction accuracy 
was only 0.34, which is not a very good fit for a predictive 
model. They found that the density and structure of a net-
work itself can properly explain whether there is possibility 
for a message to become viral. In other words, an intensively 
connected network among its nodes can properly predict the 
diffusion of a message no matter an influential or a regular 
person starts the cascade, and in a poorly connected network 
with many isolated nodes, there is no space for a message to 
propagate and again no matter who first starts it.
In addition to the global structure of the network, the con-
tent and attractiveness of the message itself is also an impor-
tant factor affecting its successful spread across a network. 
Generally, those messages that can better stimulate and 
exploit users’ cognitive biases have a better chance of prop-
agation. For example, Vosoughi et al. (2018) modeled dif-
ferential diffusion of true and false news through ~ 126,000 
stories tweeted by ~ 3 million people more than 4.5 million 
times and they concluded that false news diffuses signifi-
cantly farther, faster, deeper and more broadly than truth. 
They also found out that false stories are associated with 
fear, disgust and surprise in replies, and they showed a 
higher level of novelty compared to true news and people 
were more likely to share false news with such elements than 


Social Network Analysis and Mining (2024) 14:10	
Page 3 of 15 
10
true stories. In contrast, true stories were correlated with 
features such as anticipation, sadness, joy and trust. They 
also found that robots are indifferent in spreading false and 
true stories and the reason why false news spreads more than 
truth is because humans accelerate their diffusion and not 
robots. Like fake news, it seems conspiracy theories can also 
attract a fair amount of attention from users. In this case, 
Faddoul et al. (2020) presented a longitudinal analysis of 
YouTube’s promotion of conspiracy videos. They found that 
during 2018–2019 and based on a monthly time interval, up 
to 10% of recommended videos were outrageously fake news 
or conspiracy theories. Interestingly, the name of YouTube’s 
recommender engine, which drives 70% of YouTube views, 
is called Watch Time Optimization Algorithm and it acts like 
a “puppet master” over what users watch to keep their atten-
tion as much as it can by exploiting their cognitive biases.
Ethnic slurs can also trigger a chain of reactions from 
users, and therefore, they can accelerate propagation of a 
message or behavior in a network. In this case, Spörlein 
and Schlueter (2021) studied popular German political talk 
shows and they showed how ethnic insults propagate through 
network of comments in YouTube videos. They argue that 
ethnic insults imply social norms, they can trigger offensive 
behavior, and therefore, they can accelerate their contagious-
ness to other insulting commenting, and finally, it can lead 
to propagation of the behavior over the network. The spread 
of such comments is even faster and more intensive at the 
time of radical conflicts such as sexual assaults or terrorist 
attacks. Likewise, Andersson (2021) studied the relationship 
between impoliteness and homophily based on discussions 
underneath YouTube videos about Swedish climate activist, 
Greta Thunberg. She found out that recurrent impoliteness in 
the comment section of the videos about Greta Thunberg is 
not necessarily due to the design of social media that allows 
such behavior behind anonymity and social detachment, but 
rather this behavior can signal other like-minded users to 
form a front and build homophilous online communities.
In addition to network structure and enticing content, 
there are also a series of non-content variables such as dura-
tion, like count, positive comments, title, dislike count, view 
and negative comments that can predict the chances of a 
message or video going viral. In this regard, Halim et al. 
(2022) developed an AI-based framework to study non-con-
tent variables that affect the chances of a video to be landed 
in the trending category of YouTube.
There have been different solutions implemented to 
reduce the negative impacts of recommendation systems 
on society. For example, the design of a network itself can 
polarize or depolarize a context. In this case, Guilbeault 
et al. (2018) studied how political polarization can be 
solved between Democrats and Republicans about climate 
change. They studied whether it is the case that people not 
interacting with each other causes further polarization or 
it is the case that polarization is caused by putting people 
together. They designed an experiment in which they stud-
ied 2400 Republicans and Democrats and they found huge 
polarization between them in terms of predicting future cli-
mate change patterns. Then, they created various versions 
of a social media network where individuals from different 
political affiliations (Democrats and Republicans) had the 
option to either see or not see the political orientation of 
their counterparts. Their findings revealed that when peo-
ple interacted without the ability to observe or anticipate 
the political views of the other party, it led to a significant 
increase in interaction and social learning. Furthermore, 
this depoliticized the context, suggesting that removing vis-
ibility of political affiliations can foster greater engagement 
and reduce polarization. Structural attributes of the network 
can also dictate depolarization to its users. For example, 
Santos et al. (2021) studied the effect of different social net-
work typologies on the dynamics of polarization in social 
networks. They found that preferential link establishment 
between nodes with similar structures (i.e., nodes that share 
many neighbors between each other are structurally similar) 
encourages opinion polarization and connecting nodes with 
dissimilar structures can reduce polarization. In contrast to 
insulting, personal emotions were shown to be effective in 
bridging the gap between polarized groups. For instance, 
Kubin et al. (2021) studied YouTube comments about politi-
cal topics such as abortion in Fox News and CNN channels 
and they found that personal experiences involving harm can 
bridge moral and political divides better than facts. In other 
words, people become more tolerant toward different narra-
tives of truth when they are accomplished with subjective 
experiences involving harm than providing facts.
2  Research question and paper structure
Based on the literature review mentioned above, this paper 
aims to employ various modeling techniques to simulate the 
potential impacts of bias in YouTube’s recommendation sys-
tem on the diffusion patterns of climate change information 
in society. Accordingly, this study integrates several models, 
and these tools can function as a decision support system 
for the development and comparison of various information 
management scenarios. Put simply, the research question of 
this study is formulated as:
•	 How is climate change information diffused in society 
based on YouTube’s recommendation algorithm and the 
political media landscape?
On this basis, in the second part of the paper, different 
methodologies such as web scraping, social network analy-
sis and agent-based modeling are explained to, respectively, 


	
Social Network Analysis and Mining (2024) 14:10
10 
Page 4 of 15
extract web data, quantify the bias in the recommendation 
algorithm and simulate the competition between different 
parties in pushing their own narrative of climate change in 
society. In the third section, we showcase and visualize the 
bias in YouTube’s recommendation algorithm through social 
network analysis and statistical measures, and the results of 
agent-based modeling present the winner of the competi-
tion between different political parties in spreading climate 
change information from their own perspective. Ultimately, 
the paper concludes by discussing the main findings and 
suggesting future study directions.
3  Materials and methods
3.1  Public media bias ratings
There are different sources that rate media bias in news 
outlets. In this study, the bias rating result from (AllSides 
Media Bias Ratings 2022) has been adopted (Fig. 1), which 
has repeatedly been used as a source of data for media bias 
analysis in scientific papers. In this portal, the bias ratings 
are based on scientific and multi-partisan analysis. AllSides 
combines different crowdsourcing methods such as blind 
bias survey, editorial review, third-party analysis, independ-
ent review and community feedback for their ratings and 
in this study, their latest media bias results have been used 
(published in 2022). The media bias is categorized into five 
groups of Left, Lean Left, Center, Lean Right and Right. In 
this case, 67 news outlets were considered among which 66 
had active YouTube channels (Alternet was the only outlet 
with no YouTube channel). Then, the most popular chan-
nels were selected from Left (including Lean Left), Center 
and Right (including Lean Right) parties to feed into web 
scraping and social network analysis for measuring the bias 
in YouTube’s recommendation algorithm. The total number 
of subscribers in each category (Left, Center and Right) was 
also used as a basis to simulate the competition between 
different political perspectives in society for pushing their 
own narrative of climate change. The competition was simu-
lated by growing a hypothetical society using an agent-based 
modeling approach.
3.2  Web scraping
In this study, the web data was extracted from YouTube 
using a visual web scraping tool offered by webscraper.
io, which is a browser extension for Google Chrome. This 
extension uses a modular structure made of selectors and it 
navigates the scraper on how to traverse through the target 
website and what data to extract. The URL, title and the 
hosting channel of the videos were extracted. Accordingly, 
the data collection process for YouTube videos in this study 
involved several steps:
1)	 Web data extraction tool: The study utilized a visual 
web scraping tool provided by webscraper.io, which is 
a browser extension for Google Chrome (Baldis 2022). 
This tool allows users to extract data from websites in a 
structured manner.
2)	 Data extraction: The following details were extracted 
from YouTube for each video: the video’s URL, title and 
the hosting channel.
3)	 Preparation for unbiased data collection: To ensure 
that the data collection process was as unbiased as pos-
sible, several steps were taken. Browsing history, cache 
data and cookies were cleared. This step helps to prevent 
any personalization effects caused by YouTube’s recom-
mendation algorithm, which could skew the results. The 
user signed out of the YouTube account, and the browser 
was launched in “incognito” mode. This further reduces 
the impact of algorithmic personalization.
4)	 Initial search: The homepage of each selected YouTube 
channel was loaded, and a search for videos related to 
the keyword “Climate Change” was conducted on each 
channel to retrieve videos exclusively from the respec-
tive channel at this stage.
5)	 Featured videos: The top 30 videos resulting from the 
initial search were selected. These videos were referred 
to as “featured videos” in the paper.
6)	 First-level data collection: For each of the featured 
videos from the previous step, additional data was 
collected by clicking on them. Specifically, the study 
Fig. 1   Media bias landscape based on multi-partisan and online polit-
ical content. For detailed information on the rating method, please 
refer to source of the figure in www.​allsi​des.​com


Social Network Analysis and Mining (2024) 14:10	
Page 5 of 15 
10
checked which videos and from which channels were 
recommended on the right panel of the webpage. This 
was referred to as “recommended videos level 1.”
7)	 Second- and third-level data collection: The web 
scraper was configured to go even deeper into each 
recommended video in level 1, extracting video recom-
mendations for two more levels (“recommended videos 
levels 2 and 3”)
8)	 Structured data file: The result of this data collection 
process was a structured data file. This file allowed users 
to trace back three levels of recommended videos from 
the homepage of each media’s YouTube channel.
The data collection process is designed to minimize bias 
and provide a structured dataset for subsequent analysis and 
modeling. Figure 2 shows the schematic representation of 
the network typology used in this study to scrap YouTube 
data.
3.3  Social network analysis
Social network analysis is a mathematical framework for 
studying social structures using networks and graph theory. 
The structure of a social network is characterized by nodes 
(i.e., videos and hosting channels) and links (i.e., hyperlink 
URLs to videos and channels) that connect nodes to each 
other. In this study, Gephi version 0.10 (Bastian et al. 2009) 
was used to study the network structure of recommended 
videos and their hosting channels. In this case, a directed 
network was used to measure the frequency and distribution 
pattern of recommended videos and their hosting channels 
based on web data derived from the last step and check 
whether there is a specific biased pattern fitting into political 
agenda of each channel. The descriptive statistics of distribu-
tion pattern of recommended videos and their hosting chan-
nels were then calculated, and the Q–Q plots were drawn to 
visualize the pattern of the distribution.
3.4  Agent‑based modeling
An agent-based model is a computational tool for simulating 
the behavior, actions and interactions of autonomous agents 
with a system of values that interact locally, and the result 
of their collective interactions can lead to emergence of a 
global pattern. Agent-based models combine different ele-
ments from game theory, complex systems, computational 
sociology and evolutionary programming. They have a wide 
variety of applications in biology, ecology and social sci-
ence. In case of this study, this tool was used to simulate a 
theoretical society based on two-step flow of communication 
model (adopted from Hilbert 2023) to study the competition 
between Left, Center and Right media outlets in propagating 
climate change information in society from their own per-
spective. The relative size of the media for each party (Left, 
Center and Right) was configured based on the total number 
of subscribers to all their respective channels in YouTube. 
Three media outlets were introduced to the model as patch-
based agents on which moving agents can walk onto and col-
lect information. Moving agents represent humans in a soci-
ety that can collect and store information in their memory 
whenever they interact with a media patch. The agents were 
programmed to wander through agent-based environment 
in a random pattern such that they take a 60-degree turn 
to a random direction during each model run. Put simply, 
every time an agent walks onto a media patch of a specific 
party, they consume one unit of information from that media 
and add it to their memory and then keep track of the same 
process through the next model runs. Based on the concept 
of two-step flow of communication (Baran and Davis 2014), 
the agents were able to communicate with each other and 
affect each other’s performance.
According to two-step flow of communication model, 
most people are not directly influenced by mass media, and 
instead, their beliefs and opinions are shaped by opinion 
leaders who receive and interpret the message from the mass 
media and put them into context. In other words, opinion 
leaders or influentials are those who first get exposed to a 
specific media content and then interpret it according to 
their own opinion. The influentials then infiltrate the gen-
eral public to indoctrinate the opinion into their followers. 
This process was internalized into the model through the 
interaction and information exchange between agents such 
that when two agents with information from different media 
outlets meet each other at the same point in the environment, 
Fig. 2   Schematic representation of network typology used in this 
study to extract web data from YouTube and explore the bias in its 
recommendation system


	
Social Network Analysis and Mining (2024) 14:10
10 
Page 6 of 15
the one who has accumulated less information from a media 
patch, sets its memory back to 0. In other words, it is influ-
enced by a more influential agent, who has consumed more 
information from a different media outlet. Since the rela-
tive size of the media patches correspond to the number of 
subscribers from all their respective channels in YouTube, 
an additional element was added to the model to configure 
the results under different scenarios. In this regard, since 
the size of Left YouTube channels vastly dominate the 
media landscape, a series of weights were assigned to the 
message from the Right channels to study and compare the 
effect of media size and the weight of a message together 
on propagation of information in a society. In the context of 
this research, the weight of the message refers to the level 
of effort that a media outlet invests in crafting their message 
to make it more appealing, convincing and impactful for 
their target audience. In real-life terms, the weight of the 
message reflects the attractiveness and persuasive power of 
the content in capturing the attention of viewers and encour-
aging them to embrace the new message being conveyed. 
By assigning a weight to the message, we aimed to capture 
the potential influence and reach of the media’s narrative, 
highlighting its ability to displace prior messages and effec-
tively engage a wider audience. In other words, although 
Right media are smaller in size, what would happen if they 
allocated their resources to tailor their message in a very 
engaging and convincing manner compared to other media 
with bigger pool of subscribers? This question was explored 
by assigning weights to those agents carrying information 
from Right media in the environment. The set of weights was 
100, 10,000 and 1,000,000, respectively. Put simply, agents 
from Left and Center media can beat Right agents in infor-
mation exchange only if they have already accumulated 100, 
10,000 and 1,000,000 times more information than Right 
media agents; otherwise, the Right agents will win and set 
the information value of their counterparts back to 0. By 
comparing the results under such scenarios, one can study 
whether it is the size of the media or the weight of the mes-
sage that affects the success of a political party to push their 
own narrative of climate change in society. As a compara-
tive basis to the weighted scenarios, one more scenario was 
added in which only agents of Left and Right media compete 
but the conditions for the size of their media and the weight 
of their messages were absolutely equal.
The model parameters included three counters, measuring 
the real-time count of messages from various parties being 
carried by agents. Additionally, a slider was used to set the 
initial population size at the beginning of the model run. An 
integral component was the dynamic graph, which tracked 
the total number of messages associated with each party as 
they were being processed. This dynamic graph was used to 
monitor and analyze the flow of messages throughout the 
model’s operation, and the result of the graph was exported 
in the form of an excel file to draw Fig. 5. Netlogo version 
6.3.0 (Tisue and Wilensky 2004) was used to configure the 
agent-based model.
Figure 3 demonstrates the overall flowchart of this study.
4  Results
4.1  Public media bias ratings
The number of subscribers for each media channel was 
extracted from YouTube (Table 1). Accordingly, Left and 
Lean Left channels together totally dominate the media 
landscape in terms of both the frequency of channels and 
the total number of subscribers. The total number of sub-
scribers to Left, Center and Right channels was 80,965,200, 
23,220,700 and 26,296,350, respectively. The most popular 
channels across Left, Center and Right showed less differ-
ence in terms of the size of subscribers. CNN, BBC News 
and Fox News were the most subscribed channels for Left, 
Center and Right parties with 14,600,000, 13,700,000 and 
10,200,000 subscribers, respectively. In addition to having 
a smaller pool of subscribers, the drop rate in the number of 
subscribers across Center and Right channels is much big-
ger than that of the Left media, which means the majority of 
followers are only subscribed to first few channels. In other 
words, Left channels have a much bigger network of audi-
ences from society, higher diversity in their media landscape 
and less inequality across their media outlets. CNN, BBC 
News and Fox News were selected for web scarping and 
analyzing the bias in YouTube’s recommendation system, 
and the total number of subscribers was used as an input to 
configure the agent-based model.
4.2  Web scraping
CNN, BBC News and Fox News are not only impactful news 
organizations but also the most subscribed YouTube news 
channels among all other media outlets from their respective 
political parties. This distinction amplifies their influence on 
the digital landscape, where millions of viewers from around 
the world actively engage with their content and contribute 
to the ongoing discourse on climate change. With millions 
of viewers worldwide, these news outlets have the power to 
inform, educate and sway public opinion on climate-related 
issues. They provide a spectrum of perspectives, from pro-
gressive to conservative, which resembles the diversity of 
opinions on this matter.
The web scraping process for these channels was under-
taken separately, and it resulted in structured data files such 
that a user could feed them into social network analysis with 
minor data wrangling efforts. The extracted data included 
the title and URLs of the recommended videos and their 


Social Network Analysis and Mining (2024) 14:10	
Page 7 of 15 
10
hosting channels. The data for recommended videos and 
channels was first divided and then fed into Gephi to sepa-
rately analyze the bias in YouTube’s recommendation algo-
rithm for both recommended videos and YouTube channels.
4.3  Social network analysis
The results of social network analysis of YouTube’s rec-
ommendation algorithm are presented in Table 2, 3 and 4. 
Table 2 shows the top 10 climate change-related recom-
mended videos and YouTube channels to a Fox News viewer. 
As the titles of the videos indicate, the content of all these 
videos has a skeptical stance toward climate change. Fox 
News itself, by a big margin to the second-most suggested 
channel, is the most recommended channel to its own users, 
and most of the other top recommended channels are labeled 
under Right category in media landscape. Forbes Breaking 
News from Center and The Young Turks and MSNBC from 
the Left media are also top recommended channels to Fox 
News users but with a big difference to Fox News self-rec-
ommendations. The recommendations accounting for these 
top 10 videos and channels cover 15% and 31% of all recom-
mendations for recommended videos and channels, respec-
tively, which shows they have a very big impact on overall 
performance of YouTube’s recommendation algorithm.
Table 3 shows top 10 recommended videos and chan-
nels to BBC News users. All top recommended videos are 
from BBC News itself and it seems the content of all videos 
acknowledge climate change as a global concern except one 
video which criticizes the concept of climate change in a 
political context (video title: Vladimir Putin criticizes Greta 
Thunberg’s UN speech on climate change—BBC News). All 
top recommended channels are labeled as either Center or 
Left (only WION is labeled as slightly Right), which shows 
BBC News is more on the Left side when it comes to cli-
mate change and this matter is supported by YouTube’s rec-
ommendation algorithm as well. The top 10 recommended 
videos and channels, respectively, cover 16% and 24% of 
all recommendations made to BBC News users, and like 
Fox News, BBC News self-recommendations to its channel 
totally dominate the performance of the recommendation 
algorithm.
Table 4 shows the top 10 recommended videos and chan-
nels related to climate change to CNN users. All the top 
recommended videos predominantly originate from CNN 
itself, while the highest recommended channels consist of 
TEDx Talks, StarTalk and CNN, with minimal variations 
between them. All recommended videos confirm climate 
change as a global concern (the second top recommended 
video is a debate between a democrat and republican on 
climate change) and top recommended channels are either 
Left or Center which has a similar stance toward climate 
change. These top 10 recommendations cover 16% and 27% 
of all suggestions made to CNN users.
It seems YouTube’s recommendation algorithm 
is biased toward Left and Center media as they have a 
Fig. 3   Study flowchart


	
Social Network Analysis and Mining (2024) 14:10
10 
Page 8 of 15
chance to be among top recommended channels to Fox 
News users, but the opposite is hardly true. Center media, 
TEDx Talks channel, appears to be among top recom-
mended channels to all users of CNN, BBC News and 
Fox News followed by another Center media, DW Docu-
mentary, which is located among top recommended chan-
nels to CNN and BBC News users. In general, there are 
four YouTube channels commonly found among the top 
recommendations for both CNN and BBC News viewers. 
However, the overlap with Fox News is limited to only one 
channel. In other words, the network of Fox News users 
is less connected to the network of users from Left and 
Center, which means users of CNN and BBC News are less 
likely to end up in Right media, but Fox News users have 
a fair chance of getting recommendations from Center and 
Right channels.
Table 5 presents a series of global statistics for networks 
of recommended videos and channels to CNN, BBC News 
and Fox News users. For example, all average values are 
greater than medians for recommended videos and chan-
nels and it means the data is heavily skewed to the right and 
the skewness values also confirm the same issue. (Skew-
ness > 0.5 means data distribution is not symmetric.) This 
issue is also visually presented in Fig. 4. In other words, the 
distribution patterns of links to recommended videos and 
channels suggest that an extremely small number of videos 
and channels receive a disproportionately high number of 
recommendations, while a vast number of unique videos 
Table 1   Media outlets with active YouTube channels and the size of their subscribers (retrieved 11 January 2023)
Left and lean left
Center
Right and lean right
Channel’s name
Subscribers size Channel’s name
Subscribers size Channel’s name
Subscribers size
CNN
14,600,000
BBC News
13,700,000
Fox News
10,200,000
ABC news
14,000,000
Wall Street Journal
3,970,000
Daily Wire
2,960,000
Vox
11,000,000
Reuters
1,830,000
Daily Mail
2,200,000
NBC news
7,350,000
The Hill
1,530,000
Fox Business
2,060,000
MSNBC
5,450,000
Forbes
1,350,000
Newsmax
2,050,000
CBS news
4,710,000
NewsNation
658,000
BlazeTV
1,640,000
The New York times
4,230,000
MarketWatch
70,300
One American News 
Network
1,410,000
Guardian news
2,960,000
Newsweek
62,400
CBN News
828,000
USA TODAY
2,350,000
Axios
33,300
ReasonTV
807,000
Washington Post
2,120,000
The Christian Science 
Monitor
15,300
New York Post
805,000
Associated press
2,040,000
RealClearPolitics
1,400
The Epoch Times
543,000
The nation
1,510,000
Breitbart News
350,000
Bloomberg markets and 
finance
1,440,000
Daily Caller
253,000
Democracy now!
1,270,000
Washington Free Beacon
62,200
Time
1,230,000
The Post Millennial
30,000
Buzzfeed news
806,000
IJR—Independent Journal 
Review
26,100
The new yorker
766,000
National Review
17,900
HuffPost
711,000
The Federalist
17,200
The Atlantic
647,000
The Washington Examiner
14,800
Insider news
454,000
The Washington Times
9750
NPR
410,000
The American Conservative
6200
The intercept
245,000
The Dispatch
3300
Slate
231,000
Wall Street Journal Opinion
1520
POLITICO
116,000
American Spectator
1380
Jacobin
110,000
Mother jones
74,600
ProPublica
62,000
The daily beast
39,400
Yahoo news
33,200
Total number of subscribers
80,965,200
23,220,700
26,296,350


Social Network Analysis and Mining (2024) 14:10	
Page 9 of 15 
10
and channels receive very few recommendations through 
YouTube’s recommendation algorithm. This biased distri-
bution indicates a preference for specific content within the 
algorithm.
4.4  Agent‑based modeling
The results of agent-based modeling based on two-step flow 
of communication model are presented in Fig. 5. The results 
of agent-based modeling were exported in the form of excel 
files, and the graphs were visualized in R environment. This 
figure visualizes the results of the competition between the 
media from different political parties in spreading climate 
change information in society from their own perspective. 
Figure 5a shows the result of competition between only Left 
and Right media outlets under equal conditions. In other 
words, equal number of subscribers was assumed for both 
media with equal weights to their corresponding message. 
The figure clearly illustrates a cyclical pattern in which Left-
leaning media sources and Right-leaning media sources take 
turns in dominating the information landscape. Initially, 
Fig. 5a portrays a scenario where Right-leaning media 
outlets wield a significant influence over public discourse. 
However, as time progresses, the Left-leaning media outlets 
begin to gain momentum, eventually surpassing their Right-
leaning counterparts in terms of the volume and impact of 
their messaging, and the same cyclic pattern is constantly 
repeated over time. In essence, according to the figure, there 
is a recurrent pattern where Left-leaning and Right-leaning 
media sources take turns in dominating the societal con-
versation on climate change and there is no single absolute 
winner and both sides have equal chance in preaching their 
ecological agenda. In Figs. 5b–d, the model is configured 
for the size of the media according to the total number of 
subscribers from all their respective channels in YouTube 
and the competition was simulated with higher weights 
assigned to the message of Right media. The weights were 
100, 10,000 and 1,000,000 for Figs. 5b, c and d, respectively. 
Accordingly, the Left media under all scenarios dominate 
Right and Center media in spreading their own narrative 
of climate change in society. In other words, the size of the 
audience has a bigger impact on the success of a respec-
tive media than the weight of its message. If a media has a 
smaller network of subscribers, their message will not reach 
Table 2   Top 10 most recommended videos and YouTube channels to Fox News users
Video title
Recommendation frequency
Berkeley’s climate change solution: population control
6357
Murray: Climate activists are moving ‘too far too fast’
3584
Tucker: CNN’s climate change town hall was an act of wanton cruelty
3340
Gutfeld: The Left’s hypocritical world of climate change
3323
How Patagonia took it upon itself to fight climate change
3145
Climate protest backfires as parolee can’t get to work
3041
What’s the biggest threat—China, Russia or climate change? | Americans Weigh In
2164
We need more Republicans to say climate change is real: Jessica Tarlov
2121
Tucker roasts Jane Fonda for claiming racism causes climate change #shorts
2079
McEnany: Climate change is now to blame for everything
1844
Sum of the links made through these top 10 recommendations
30,998 (15% of all links)
Total number of links made in the whole dataset
213,202
Channel name
Recommendation frequency
Fox News
18,126
Forbes Breaking News
7970
Sky News Australia
5602
The Young Turks
3517
TEDx Talks
3007
Jordan B Peterson
2676
John Stossel
2671
The Telegraph
2309
Fox Business
2240
MSNBC
1918
Sum of the links made through these top 10 recommendations
50,036 (31% of all links)
Total number of links made in the whole dataset
159,921


	
Social Network Analysis and Mining (2024) 14:10
10 
Page 10 of 15
beyond a certain limit no matter how big the weight of their 
message is, and in contrast, if a media has a bigger pool of 
followers, their message will reach to broader network of 
people in society no matter how small the weight of their 
message is. Accordingly, owing to their relatively equal net-
work sizes, the graphs for Right and Center media outlets 
illustrate similar patterns (Figs. 5b–d), with competition 
between these two parties being more balanced compared 
to the Left media outlets, which completely dominate the 
information landscape regarding climate change discourse.
5  Discussion
It is estimated that over 2 billion people worldwide collec-
tively spend 1 billion hours watching YouTube videos each 
day, which positions YouTube as the second-most visited 
website globally, right after Google. Moreover, it holds the 
distinction of being the most popular video-sharing social 
network on the planet. YouTube’s recommendation algo-
rithm is the main mediator that decides which videos to be 
suggested to such a huge number of users from a database 
with millions of video records. It is estimated that 70% of 
total watch time in the entire platform is driven by its rec-
ommendation engine (Covington et al. 2016), and therefore, 
its massive social and ethical implications are undeniable. 
Understanding the bias and the mechanism through which 
YouTube’s recommendation system works can bring trans-
parency to both content creators and users (Wojcicki 2021), 
and it also helps decision makers in the realm of digital com-
panies to regulate and control the possible implications of 
such technologies through proper legislative channels (Bros-
sard 2013; Iyengar and Massey 2019). In this case, Demo-
crats introduced Protecting Americans from Dangerous 
Algorithms Act. In 2021 to hold YouTube accountable for 
the social effects of its recommendation system (Tutt 2017).
Biased recommendation systems can actively change 
and form information landscape in a society. In the case 
of climate change, recommendation systems have a major 
impact on formation of attitudes in society toward the issue 
and climate change itself has fundamental implications in 
economic and political domains (Törnberg 2022). In other 
words, users only following conservative and Right media 
are more likely the disagree with the effects of climate 
Table 3   Top 10 most recommended videos and YouTube channels to BBC News users
Video title
Recommendation frequency
Arnold Schwarzenegger calls leaders ‘liars’ over climate change—BBC News
4573
Global water crisis looming, UN says—BBC News
3872
Climate Change: Professor Brian Cox clashes with sceptic Malcolm Roberts—BBC News
3703
Why should we care about climate change? BBC News
2986
Vladimir Putin criticises Greta Thunberg’s UN speech on climate change—BBC News
2627
Climate Change: Your carbon footprint explained—BBC News
2404
Is climate change to blame for extreme heat in Europe?—BBC News
2355
Arctic polar bears “face near-extinction within decades” warn scientists—BBC News
2321
UN scientists say it’s ‘now or never’ to limit global warming—BBC News
1649
Global warming set to break key 1.5Ctemperature limit for first time #Shorts #ClimateChange#ElNino
1532
Sum of the links made through these top 10 recommendations
28,022 (16% of all links)
Total number of links made in the whole dataset
171,534
Channel name
Recommendation frequency
BBC News
7993
BBC Learning English
4418
TEDx Talks
3634
Sky News
2631
WION
2379
DW Documentary
2334
PBS NewsHour
2290
NBC News
2060
CNN
1867
Channel 4 News
1695
Sum of the links made through these top 10 recommendations
31,301 (24% of all links)
Total number of links made in the whole dataset
128,676


Social Network Analysis and Mining (2024) 14:10	
Page 11 of 15 
10
change and followers of Left and Center media are more 
likely to consider climate change as a serious issue that 
requires international collaboration and global govern-
ance. Put simply, such technological systems can turn an 
ecological concern into a political agenda and therefore 
politicize the context and cause polarization in society.
The findings of this study suggest that YouTube’s recom-
mendation system is extremely biased toward certain vid-
eos and channels depending on which channel a user starts 
browning climate change content and it seems the content 
and political affiliation of highly recommended videos 
and channels fit the corresponding political affiliation of 
Table 4   Top 10 most recommended videos and YouTube channels to CNN users
Video title
Recommendation frequency
Climate change is affecting the food you eat. Here’s how
5023
Bill Nye, Marc Morano on Global Warming
3156
Is climate change to blame for this?
2771
Undeniable climate change facts
2359
DeGrasse Tyson: We have to believe science on climate change
2354
Climate change made these women question whether or not to have children
2306
OBAMA CLIMATE CHANGE-SEA LEVEL IN NY
2179
Obama slams GOP on climate change
2098
Scientist laughs at climate change skeptics
2003
Clinton: Trump called climate change a Chinese hoax
1999
Sum of the links made through these top 10 recommendations
26,248 (16% of all links)
Total number of links made in the whole dataset
165,206
Channel name
Recommendation frequency
TEDx Talks
5822
StarTalk
5639
CNN
5311
TED
3751
PBS NewsHour
2826
CBS News
2157
Vox
1985
The Obama White House
1960
DW Documentary
1851
Wall Street Journal
1842
Sum of the links made through these top 10 recommendations
33,144 (27% of all links)
Total number of links made in the whole dataset
123,912
Table 5   Descriptive statistics derived from distribution of links to recommended videos and channels based on YouTube recommendation sys-
tem (in this table REC means recommended)
YouTube channel
Fox News
BBC News
CNN
REC videos REC channels REC videos REC channels REC videos REC channels
Number of unique REC videos/channels
21,871
4360
18,008
4190
16,748
4403
Average number of links to a REC video/channel
9.75
36.68
9.53
30.71
9.86
28.14
Median of all links
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Mode of all links
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Skewness of links distribution across all REC videos/
channels
38.46
36.32
34.45
20.15
32.66
17.95
Kurtosis of links distribution across all REC videos/
channels
2,062.99
1716.55
1,498.40
610.91
1,458.47
418.92


	
Social Network Analysis and Mining (2024) 14:10
10 
Page 12 of 15
a specific channel. Therefore, future studies can study the 
social effect of such highly biased recommendation pattern 
in a more explicit way. For example, the comment section 
of these videos can provide a rich pool of data for emo-
tions and attitudes toward climate change, and analyzing 
these comments across videos and channels can shed lights 
on the mechanism through which recommendation system 
causes polarization over climate change and related topics. 
YouTube provides valuable information in many different 
contexts that can be implemented in various branches of 
science (Jagiello et al. 2019; Kikuch et al. 2022; Gorgy et al. 
2022; Sütcüoğlu et al. 2022; Silek and Topcuoglu 2023). 
Accordingly, the results suggest that an echo chamber 
exists in YouTube’s recommendation algorithm. In discus-
sions about news media, an echo chamber is a situation in 
which people are put in a closed and insulated system to only 
engage with beliefs or opinions that confirm their own, and 
therefore, the existing views are constantly reinforced, and 
opposition views are actively excluded from engagement. 
In other words, echo chambers exploit humans’ cognitive 
biases such as confirmation bias to nudge the users into an 
effortless and self-amplifying loop to absorb their attention 
as much as possible and maximize their activity on the plat-
form by pulling them deeper inside the matrix. Likewise, 
Kirdemir et al. (2021) found structural and systematic bias 
in YouTube’s video recommendations with varying degrees 
between different experiments and the results of the study 
by Alfano et al. (2021) confirm the radicalization effect of 
YouTube’s recommendation system on its users. With the 
same spirit, Markmann and Grimme (2021) investigated the 
polarizing effect of YouTube’s recommendation algorithm 
with particular focus on “autoplay” function. They stud-
ied different recommendation pathways with personalized 
accounts and anonymous users, and they found that although 
Fig. 4   Q–Q plots visualizing distribution patterns of link frequencies to recommended videos, (left panel) and channels (right panel) through 
YouTube’s recommendation system


Social Network Analysis and Mining (2024) 14:10	
Page 13 of 15 
10
YouTube uses such mechanism to capture users’ attention, 
the increasing public awareness regarding the effect of rec-
ommendation systems has led to algorithmic parametrization 
of video recommendations to moderate content. In the same 
way, Hosseinmardi et al. (2021) reported similar results 
about the effect of YouTube’s recommendation system that 
is dominated by mainstream and largely centrist sources 
compared to far-right and anti-woke groups. For example, 
they did not find any systematic correlation between anti-
woke and far-right channels in this platform.
Crane and Sornette (2008) used a time series of daily 
views for almost 5 million YouTube videos to model and 
predict the reaction of a social system to endogenous and 
exogenous variables. In other words, by monitoring the reac-
tion of social systems and collective human dynamics in 
response to YouTube videos over time, we can model the 
relationships between the digital content and actual humans’ 
reaction to these content in the real world. Based on such 
models, it is possible to predict what type of content can 
stimulate a specific response from societies. This concept 
is operationalized in, for example, the GDELT project (The 
GDELT Project 2022). The GDELT project monitors the 
world’s broadcast print and web news in every country and 
in more than 100 languages and detects and maps peaceful 
or aggressive reactions to such news. By monitoring and col-
lecting such data over time and projecting the corresponding 
response from social systems in a spatial manner, this project 
can model the spatiotemporal dynamics of the relationships 
between news and the respective response to them on the 
ground. Accordingly, developers can use such models to 
stimulate a target society into a specific response by broad-
casting engineered news into their mass media.
The results of the agent-based model confirm the 
findings of Watts and Dodds (2007) and Bakshy et al. 
(2011). Put simply, the size and structure of the network 
are decisive factors on successful spread of a message in 
the society. If the network is already small and isolated, 
for example Right YouTube channels have a smaller pool 
Fig. 5   Results of agent-based modeling based on two-step flow 
of communication model. This figure visualizes the competition 
between mass media from Left, Center and Right political par-
ties in propagating climate change information in society from their 
own perspective. (a) This figure serves as a comparative basis to 
show under equal conditions (the same weight for the message and 
the same audience size), there is an equal chance for each media to 
propagate their message and it is reflected in the recurrent cyclic pat-
tern through which Left and Right parties switch turns over time in 
dominating the media landscape. (b–d) These figures visualize the 
competition between Left, Center and Right media in distributing 
climate change information based on the size of their subscribers in 
YouTube and unequal weights for their message. The weights were 
only assigned to Right media to increase the power of their message 
in competing with Center and Left media, who have a bigger num-
ber of subscribers together than the Right channels in YouTube. The 
weights are 100, 10,000 and 1,000,000 for b, c and d, respectively. In 
b, c and d figures, the y axis is log-transformed


	
Social Network Analysis and Mining (2024) 14:10
10 
Page 14 of 15
of subscribers and they are actively excluded from being 
recommended to Left and Center media, the message 
cannot spread beyond a certain limit no matter what is 
the weight of the message or how influential the preacher 
of the message is. Santos et al. (2021) reported a similar 
concept using network terminology as preferential net-
work typology increases polarization and differential link 
establishment between networks with different structures 
can reduce polarization. However, when comparing the 
messages within the same network, those messages that 
are more enticing and engaging have a higher chance of 
diffusion in that particular network no matter whether a 
celebrity or a regular person starts the cascade. Therefore, 
it is important to differentiate between diffusion of differ-
ent a message across various networks or within the same 
network as driving forces of information propagation in 
these networks are different.
It is important to note that not only the recommendation 
system, but also the design of YouTube causes radicaliza-
tion and encourages partisan sorting among its users. In this 
regard, Guilbeault et al. (2018) reported the same findings 
when studying the attitudes toward climate change between 
Democrats and Republicans. It is because YouTube users 
can easily spot the logos and names of channels, and there-
fore, their cognitive biases will prevent them from clicking 
on videos of the opposing groups even if those videos get 
a small chance to pop up into their recommendation list. 
Abul-Fottouh et al. (2020) and Andersson (2021) reported 
the same results as people tend to be attracted to like-minded 
individuals and groups in social media.
The influence of various factors on YouTube’s recom-
mendation algorithm, such as watch time, likes and shares, 
represents an intriguing area for further research. Explor-
ing how these factors affect the dissemination of climate 
change information within the platform’s recommendation 
system could provide valuable insights into the reliability 
and applicability of findings of this paper. Future studies 
could focus on investigating the specific impact of these fac-
tors on the recommended content and the subsequent diffu-
sion of climate change narratives. By incorporating these 
parameters into agent-based models, researchers can aim to 
create more realistic simulations that capture the complex 
interplay between political media landscapes, recommen-
dation systems and the spread of climate-related informa-
tion. Additionally, considering the role of user engagement 
metrics, social network dynamics and demographic factors 
in shaping YouTube’s recommendations could contribute 
to a more comprehensive understanding of the underlying 
mechanisms at play. This expanded investigation would 
not only shed further light on the current patterns but also 
inform strategies for improving the accuracy and transpar-
ency of recommendation algorithms in addressing climate 
change discourse.
6  Conclusions
The results of this study provide evidence that YouTube’s 
recommendation system is highly biased in recommending 
certain videos and channels to users of different channels 
with a political stance toward climate change. In other 
words, there is a tight correlation between ecological 
concerns of a certain party and their political agenda and 
YouTube’s recommendation algorithm can potentially 
reinforce this relationship by recommending content that 
fits the political taste of subscribers to these channels.
The result of the competition between different politi-
cal views toward climate change was simulated based on 
the size of subscribers for each party in YouTube, and 
results suggest Left media that are already controlling a 
sizable chunk of the network in YouTube will dominate 
the information landscape by pushing their own narrative 
of climate change. In addition, Center media have the same 
stance toward climate change as Left news channels, and 
they can amplify the spread of their respective message as 
there is more connectivity between their media than with 
media from the Right. Future studies can further explore 
and model the relationships between the size, the weight 
and the number of media to produce additional insights 
on the outcome of competition between different narra-
tives in society. Such findings shed light on the mechanism 
through which public perception on climate change is cre-
ated and shaped by recommendation systems and digital 
companies.
Acknowledgements  The author would like to express sincere gratitude 
to Aruna Rani Deb for her kind assistance in collecting the relevant 
literature. Additionally, the author extends appreciation to anonymous 
reviewers whose constructive comments contributed to the enhance-
ment of this paper.
Author contributions  The development of conceptual framework, data 
collection and analysis and visualizations have been done by the cor-
responding author of the paper Y.S.
Funding  Open Access funding provided by University of Helsinki 
(including Helsinki University Central Hospital).
Declarations 
Competing interests  The authors declare no competing interests.
Conflict of interest  None.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 


Social Network Analysis and Mining (2024) 14:10	
Page 15 of 15 
10
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Abul-Fottouh D, Song MY, Gruzd A (2020) Examining algorithmic 
biases in YouTube’s recommendations of vaccine videos. Int J 
Med Informatics 140:104175
Alfano M, Fard AE, Carter JA, Clutton P, Klein C (2021) Techno-
logically scaffolded atypical cognition: The case of YouTube’s 
recommender system. Synthese 199(1):835–858
AllSides Media Bias Ratings. (2022). Media bias rating methods | 
How AllSides rates media bias, [online] Available: https://​www.​
allsi​des.​com/​media-​bias/​media-​bias-​rating-​metho​ds.
Andersson M (2021) The climate of climate change: impoliteness as 
a hallmark of homophily in youtube comment threads on greta 
thunberg’s environmental activism. J Pragmat 178:93–107
Bakshy E, Hofman JM, Mason WA, Watts DJ (2011) Everyone’s an 
influencer: quantifying influence on twitter. In: proceedings of 
the fourth ACM international conference on Web search and data 
mining (pp. 65–74).
Baldis M (2022) Making web data extraction easy and accessible for 
everyone. https://​websc​raper.​io/
Baran SJ, Davis DK (2014) Theories of mass communication: glossary. 
Introduction to Mass Communication. McGraw-Hill Education, 
New York City
Bastian M, Heymann S, Jacomy M (2009) Gephi: an open source soft-
ware for exploring and manipulating networks. In: proceedings of 
the international AAAI conference on web and social media vol. 
3 no. 1 pp 361–362
Brossard D (2013) New media landscapes and the science information 
consumer. Proc Natl Acad Sci 110(3):14096–14101
Covington P, Adams J, Sargin E (2016) Deep neural networks for You-
Tube recommendations. In: proceedings of the 10th ACM confer-
ence on recommender systems pp 191–198
Epstein R, Robertson RE (2015) The search engine manipulation effect 
(SEME) and its possible impact on the outcomes of elections. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci 112(33):E4512–E4521
Faddoul M, Chaslot G, Farid H (2020) A longitudinal analysis of You-
Tube’s promotion of conspiracy videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:​
2003.​03318.
Feezell JT, Wagner JK, Conroy M (2021) Exploring the effects of algo-
rithm-driven news sources on political behavior and polarization. 
Comput Hum Behav 116:106626
Gorgy A, El Hawary H, Galli R, MacDonald M, Barone N, Thibaudeau 
S (2022) Evaluating the educational quality of surgical youtube® 
videos: a systematic review. Health Sci Rev 11:100067
Guilbeault D, Becker J, Centola D (2018) Social learning and partisan 
bias in the interpretation of climate trends. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
115(39):9714–9719
Halim Z, Hussain S, Ali RH (2022) Identifying content unaware fea-
tures influencing popularity of videos on YouTube: a study based 
on seven regions. Expert Syst Appl 206:117836
Hilbert, M. (2023). Computational Science Specialization, Coursera. 
https://​www.​cours​era.​org/​speci​aliza​tions/​compu​tatio​nal-​social-​
scien​ce-​ucdav​is
Hosseinmardi H, Ghasemian A, Clauset A, Mobius M, Rothschild DM, 
Watts DJ (2021) Examining the consumption of radical content on 
YouTube. Proc Natl Acad Sci 118(32):e2101967118
Iyengar S, Massey DS (2019) Scientific communication in a post-truth 
society. Proc Natl Acad Sci 116(16):7656–7661
Jagiello ZA, Dyderski MK, Dylewski Ł (2019) What can we learn 
about the behaviour of red and grey squirrels from YouTube? 
Eco Inform 51:52–60
Kikuchi Y, Nishimura I, Sasaki T (2022) Wild birds in YouTube vid-
eos: Presence of specific species contributes to increased views. 
Eco Inform 71:101767
Kirdemir B, Kready J, Mead E, Hussain MN, Agarwal N, Adjeroh D 
(2021) Assessing bias in YouTube’s video recommendation algo-
rithm in a cross-lingual and cross-topical context. In: international 
conference on social computing, behavioral-cultural modeling and 
prediction and behavior representation in modeling and simula-
tion. Springer, Cham. pp 71–80
Kosinski M (2021) Facial recognition technology can expose politi-
cal orientation from naturalistic facial images. Sci Rep 11(1):1–7
Kreiss D, McGregor SC (2018) Technology firms shape political com-
munication: the work of microsoft, facebook, twitter, and google 
with campaigns during the 2016 US presidential cycle. Polit Com-
mun 35(2):155–177
Kubin E, Puryear C, Schein C, Gray K (2021) Personal experiences 
bridge moral and political divides better than facts. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci 118(6):e2008389118
Markmann S, Grimme C (2021) Is youtube still a radicalizer? An 
exploratory study on autoplay and recommendation. Multidis-
ciplinary International Symposium on Disinformation in Open 
Online Media. Springer, Cham, pp 50–65
Milano S, Taddeo M, Floridi L (2020) Recommender systems and their 
ethical challenges. AI & Soc 35(4):957–967
Milano S, Taddeo M, Floridi L (2021) Ethical aspects of multi-stake-
holder recommendation systems. Inf Soc 37(1):35–45
Santos FP, Lelkes Y, Levin SA (2021) Link recommendation algo-
rithms and dynamics of polarization in online social networks. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci 118(50):e2102141118
Silek H, Topcuoglu OB (2023) Analysis of YouTube videos as a source 
of information for reliability and effectiveness of cannabidiol oil 
in treatment of epilepsy. Epilepsy Behav 138:109017
Spörlein C, Schlueter E (2021) Ethnic insults in youtube comments: 
social contagion and selection effects during the German “refugee 
crisis.” Eur Sociol Rev 37(3):411–428
Sütcüoğlu O, Özay Zİ, Özet A, Yazıcı O, Özdemir N (2022) Evaluation 
of scientific reliability and quality of youtube videos on cancer 
and nutrition. Nutrition 108:111933
The GDELT project. (2022). https://​www.​gdelt​proje​ct.​org/
Tisue S, Wilensky U (2004) Netlogo: a simple environment for mod-
eling complexity. Int Conf Comp Syst 21:16–21
Törnberg P (2022) How digital media drive affective polari-
zation through partisan sorting. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
119(42):e2207159119
Tutt A (2017) An FDA for algorithms. Admin l Rev 69:83
Vosoughi S, Roy D, Aral S (2018) The spread of true and false news 
online. Science 359(6380):1146–1151
Watts DJ, Dodds PS (2007) Influentials, networks, and public opinion 
formation. J Consumer Res 34(4):441–458
Wojcicki S (2021) Letter from Susan: our 2021 priorities. YouTube 
Off Blog 26:30–37
Youyou W, Kosinski M, Stillwell D (2015) Computer-based personality 
judgments are more accurate than those made by humans. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci 112(4):1036–1040
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
