Received: 18 April 2024 / Accepted: 25 February 2025 / Published online: 12 March 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
	
 Ziwei Wang
21482837@life.hkbu.edu.hk
1	
Division of Emerging Interdisciplinary Areas, Hong Kong University of Science and 
Technology, Hong Kong, China
2	
Department of Communication, School of Public Policy, Roper Center for Public Opinion 
Research, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
3	
School of Communication, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China
4	
Department of Communication and Global Development, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
5	
Department of Political Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Bridging ideologies: analyzing the use of moral language 
and framing in social media discourse on climate change by 
U.S. congress members through computational approaches
Yunya Song1
 · Jonathon P. Schuldt2
 · Yin Zhang3
 · Ziwei Wang3
 · 
Y. Connie Yuan4
 · Sheng Zou3
 · Jun Li5
Climatic Change (2025) 178:56
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-025-03898-4
Abstract
The discourse on climate change transcends scientific discussions and policy debates, of­
ten incorporating moral language and ethical considerations. This study explores framing 
strategies in political persuasion and the underlying moral foundations associated with 
climate change by combining computational methods and critical discourse analysis of 
tweets from 111th-117th U.S. Congresses members. The aim is to map out the bipartisan 
trends in the use of moral language and framing concerning climate change issues, thereby 
enriching the understanding of public opinion dynamics and the evolving partisan divide 
on climate action. Our findings reveal an intensifying partisan polarization in framing. 
Contrary to the expected moral divide, we uncover a bipartisan agreement on the moral 
foundation of care and fairness, and a consistent cross-party employment of moral lan­
guage associated with frames over time. The interplay between generic frames and moral 
foundations suggests the potential for collective action on climate change across the po­
litical spectrum.
Keywords  Climate change · U.S. Congress · Framing · Moral foundations theory · 
Computational methods
1 3


Climatic Change (2025) 178:56
The discourse surrounding climate change is not only a matter of scientific consensus and 
policy debate but is also deeply intertwined with moral and ethical considerations (Mar­
kowitz and Shariff 2012). As the global community grapples with the escalating impacts 
of climate change, the moral dimension of environmental stewardship has become increas­
ingly prominent. This intersection of morality and climate discourse has garnered signifi­
cant academic interest, leading researchers to explore how moral concerns are articulated in 
the context of climate change and how these articulations influence public perception and 
policy preferences.
Moral language cues have been identified as an important factor in guiding individuals’ 
attention (Brady et al. 2019). Moral language, and the ways that language is used to frame 
issues along moral lines, can activate and intensify beliefs, and change the types of deci­
sions and policies people are willing to accept (Anderson et al. 2013). Furthermore, as moral 
values are associated with social and political identity and represent politicized discourse 
(Wetts 2020), the use of moral frames can trigger in-group identification and loyalty, thereby 
yielding stronger persuasive effects (Hurst and Stern 2020). A pivotal area of study within 
this realm focuses on the moral frameworks employed by political elites to reinforce soli­
darity within their respective political factions. Existing research (e.g., Graham et al. 2009; 
Sterling and Jost 2018) highlights how moral language as a vehicle for conveying moral 
values plays a crucial role in the persuasive tactics of political figures aiming to galvanize 
their base.
However, the moral divide between conservatives and liberals is by no means absolute 
(Dickinson et al. 2016) or binary (Graham et al. 2009). Sterling and Jost (2018) found in an 
analysis of congressional tweets from 2014 that Democrats, in addition to using moral val­
ues of care and fairness (“individualizing foundations”), also employed purity and loyalty-
related language (“binding foundations”), which is assumed to be more commonly used by 
Republicans. Day et al. (2014) found that when general pro-environmental appeals matched 
the moral values of conservatives, they had consistent positive effects across an array of 
environmental attitudes and behaviors (see also Wolsko et al. 2016). More broadly, recent 
research found no evidence for a consistent pattern of ideological differences in the use of 
moral language across topics (Wang and Inbar 2021).
The debate over climate change constitutes an illuminating case for the complex strate­
gies politicians employ to shape public opinion and policy. Central to this dialogue are the 
notions of generic frames and moral language, which serve as critical tools in the arse­
nal of political communication. Generic frames offer a lens through which complex issues 
are simplified and made relatable to the public, facilitating engagement with and under­
standing of the climate crisis. Moral language, on the other hand, appeals to the ethical 
values and principles of individuals, evoking emotional responses and moral judgments 
that can significantly sway public opinion and drive policy initiatives. For example, Vainio 
and Mäkiniemi (2016) found that there were differences between general and issue-specific 
moral concerns, which have implications for their association with political orientation 
and pro-environmental behavior. The endorsement of general moral foundations made the 
effect of political orientation on climate-friendly choices disappear. They further developed 
an issue-specific measure of moral foundations and found that binding foundations (i.e., 
ingroup/loyalty, authority/respect, and purity/sanctity) were associated with the avoidance 
of climate-friendly choices among right-wing individuals.
1 3
56 
Page 2 of 20


Climatic Change (2025) 178:56
This study explores the moral foundations and framing strategies used in political per­
suasion regarding climate change in the U.S., where the issue remains highly politicized. 
It underscores the divergent approaches stemming from broader ideological belief systems 
and their alignment with political parties in the U.S. Specifically, the study highlights that 
political liberals, who tend to align with the Democratic Party, generally acknowledge and 
advocate for policies addressing anthropogenic climate change, whereas political con­
servatives, who are more often associated with the Republican Party, have demonstrated 
significant skepticism and resistance to such policies over the last two decades (Andrews 
and Smirnov 2020; McCright and Dunlap 2011). While this correlation is not absolute—
acknowledging that not all Democrats are liberal and not all Republicans are conserva­
tive—it reflects a prevailing trend in U.S. politics.1 This division is sometimes attributed 
to different moral foundations that underpin the political spectrum (e.g., Park et al. 2010). 
Drawing on Moral Foundations Theory (MFT), previous studies has shown that the political 
left tends to emphasize values of fairness and care (“individualizing foundations”), whereas 
the right prioritizes loyalty, sanctity, and authority (“binding foundations”) (e.g., Kugler 
et al. 2014). This dichotomy in moral prioritization not only shapes political identities but 
also informs the strategies employed in political messaging. Such targeted communication, 
adopting the specific moral languages resonant with these foundational values, has been 
demonstrated to effectively engage and motivate policy compliance across the ideological 
spectrum (cf. Ryan 2014; Salomon et al. 2017; Skitka and Bauman 2008).
The objective of this study is to map out the bipartisan trends in moral language and 
framing of climate change issues, thereby enriching the understanding of public opinion 
dynamics and the evolving partisan divide on climate action. The distinction in moral lan­
guage and framing between liberals and conservatives points to a deeper ideological divide 
in perceptions of environmental responsibility and ethical obligation. It underscores the role 
of moral foundations in shaping political discourse on climate change, suggesting that effec­
tive communication strategies may need to account for these underlying moral differences.
Moreover, our analysis aims to uncover common concerns and moral foundations regard­
ing climate change that transcend party lines. By understanding the moral underpinnings 
of climate discourse, policymakers, activists, and communicators can craft more resonant 
messages that bridge ideological divides and foster a more inclusive approach to address­
ing the global climate crisis. There is a heightened need for research to explore the nuanced 
relationship between moral language, socioeconomic themes, and climate change discourse. 
Such investigations could provide invaluable insights into how moral foundations influence 
framing strategies and, in turn, public engagement with climate issues.
Our study employs automatic text analysis of social media posts—specifically, tweets 
about climate change made by members of the 111th to 117th U.S. Congress. Given Twit­
ter's (now known as X) pivotal role in online political discourse, this platform serves as a 
primary medium for Congress members to engage with constituents and the public at large 
(Jones et al. 2018). Due to the Congress members’ status as public figures, we argue that 
their tweets go beyond mere expressions of personally held beliefs or attitudes to strategi­
1 In the United States, political party affiliation often correlates with ideological leanings, but significant 
diversity exists within each party. The Democratic Party is generally associated with more liberal positions, 
particularly on issues like climate change, while the Republican Party is commonly linked to more conserva­
tive stances. However, not all Democrats identify as liberals, nor do all Republicans identify as conservatives. 
These correlations reflect broad trends rather than rigid definitions.
1 3
Page 3 of 20 
56


Climatic Change (2025) 178:56
cally align with their partisan interests and their constituents’ expectations, even though 
their expressions may be conveyed in a manner that evokes a sense of authenticity. Meth­
odologically, we first utilized the extended Moral Foundations Dictionary to assess the 
moral content of Congress members’ tweets, enhancing the precision of moral foundation 
measurements through crowd-sourced lexicon annotations. Next, we employed a hybrid 
computer-assisted method to identify and classify the underlying climate change frames in 
these tweets, integrating corpus linguistics with theory-driven deductive coding to outline 
the discourse strategies of Congress members. By utilizing computer-assisted text analy­
sis techniques, we aim to provide a nuanced perspective on the communicative dynamics 
underpinning the discourse on climate change among members of Congress (Caprara et al. 
2006; Graham et al. 2009; Neiman et al. 2016; Sagi and Dehghani 2014).
1  Theoretical background
1.1  Moral foundations, political persuasion and environmental issues
The discourse on climate change often intersects with both moral and material consider­
ations, underscoring the complexity of persuasion strategies employed by political actors 
(Wolsko et al. 2016). Two independent yet interrelated dimensions of moral foundation 
expressions are worth noting: moral values and moral language use. Moral values justify in-
group beliefs with sacred principles, resulting in different usage of moral language to defend 
the group identity and outcast “wicked” outgroup members (Wang and Inbar 2021). Moral 
language is a tool often used by politicians to influence public debates and persuade voters 
(Clifford and Jerit 2013). Since voters tend to associate an issue with their moral values, 
morality can then function as a motivator for actions (Fiske and Rai 2014).
On the issue of climate change specifically, moralization is arguably a cause for the wide­
spread political polarization (Feinberg and Willer 2013). Liberals are more likely to view 
climate change as a moral issue than conservatives, and are more likely to consider a range 
of specific pro-environmental behaviors (e.g., recycling, buying green products, and using 
reusable bags) to be “moral” (Currie and Choma 2018). To closely examine the moral com­
munication surrounding climate change, we first review existing theories of moral values, 
and then explore the scholarship on moral language use.
One of the most influential theories concerning moral values is the Moral Foundations 
Theory (MFT), a comprehensive framework that delineates fundamental moral values uni­
versally recognized across cultures. The MFT identifies five core moral domains: harm/care, 
fairness/reciprocity, ingroup/loyalty, authority/respect, and purity/sanctity. Of these, harm/
care and fairness/reciprocity are categorized as individualizing values due to their emphasis 
on the rights of individuals. In contrast, ingroup/loyalty, authority/respect, and purity/sanc­
tity are labeled as binding values, highlighting cohesion within groups through duties and 
loyalty (Van Leeuwen and Park 2009). The expressions of these moral values play a pivotal 
role in policy persuasion, as they align closely with the political ideologies that influence 
individuals’ behaviors and attitudes towards policies and governmental issues. This correla­
tion has been explored extensively in political communication studies, revealing that liber­
als generally prioritize individualizing foundations, while conservatives are more inclined 
towards binding foundations (Miles 2016).
1 3
56 
Page 4 of 20


Climatic Change (2025) 178:56
A similar distinction is also manifested in the discussion over climate change. Much of 
the political discourse on climate change aligns with individualizing foundations, such as 
harm and fairness, which may resonate more strongly with political liberals. Democrats 
typically employ themes of intergenerational equity, sustainability, and moral obligations to 
nature, leveraging the harm and fairness foundations to advocate for environmental actions 
(Nisbet 2009; Zhou 2016). Conversely, Republicans are less likely to view pro-environ­
mental actions through a moral lens (Markowitz and Shariff 2012). When they need to 
emphasize the moral implications of climate change, Republicans may resort to binding 
foundations like in-group loyalty and deference to authority, reflecting a distinct moral per­
spective (Markowitz 2012; Markowitz and Shariff 2012).
In addition to the distinction between parties, bipartisan moral values in environmental 
discussions present a unique case where traditional ideological distinctions may occasion­
ally become blurred. Feinberg and Willer’s (2013) study illustrates that when environmental 
policies are framed in terms of purity/sanctity, the typical ideological differences diminish. 
This suggests that environmental degradation, viewed as a desecration of the world, can 
evoke a strong moral response of disgust that transcends political affiliations. Addition­
ally, Wolsko and colleagues (2016) demonstrated that conservatives could be persuaded 
by pro-environmental appeals in line with their moral values, indicating that the moral 
divide between political parties may be more flexible than previously believed. Therefore, 
a thorough examination of the moral values evoked by political elites regarding climate 
change may provide important insights. Theoretically, this exploration could enhance our 
understanding of the established relationship between political ideologies and moral values. 
Practically, it offers guidance on how to strategically articulate different moral concerns to 
garner broader support. Therefore, we propose the following research question:
RQ1: What moral values do Republican and Democratic members of Congress express in 
their communications about climate change?
H1: Social media posts (tweets) from Democrats will contain a higher percentage of terms 
related to individualizing values, whereas tweets from Republicans will feature a greater 
percentage of terms associated with binding values.
The divergence in moral values between the two parties even extends to their moral lan­
guage use in discussions of vice (moral violations) versus virtue (morally righteous actions). 
Studies have identified a pattern where liberals are more inclined to employ terms associ­
ated with virtue, whereas conservatives tend to favor terms related to vice. This tendency 
was highlighted in a comprehensive analysis of U.S. congressional records from 1994 to 
2016, revealing that Democrats more frequently used positive (virtue) words, especially 
in the context of ingroup loyalty, while Republicans were more prone to using negative 
(vice) words (Takikawa and Sakamoto 2020). Regarding climate change, specifically, cli­
mate skeptics were found to prefer vice terms such as “bad” and “false,” while still using 
virtue terms like “truth,” “integrity,” and “trust” when questioning the validity of scientific 
research on climate change. In comparison, climate change believers strongly endorsed vir­
tue terms (Diakopoulos et al. 2014). Another study (Fulgoni et al. 2016) found that liberals 
were more likely to use harm-vice, fairness-virtue and loyalty-vice language when discuss­
ing climate change, as compared to conservatives, who used authority-vice more intensively 
1 3
Page 5 of 20 
56


Climatic Change (2025) 178:56
when denouncing the lack of loyalty and respect for authority. Based on these findings, we 
propose the following hypothesis for further investigation:
H2: Democrats will use a higher proportion of positive (virtue-related) words in their tweets, 
whereas Republicans will use a higher proportion of negative (vice-related) words.
These hypotheses aim to explore the nuanced ways in which political parties communicate 
their moral standings and engage with their target audience through social media, illuminat­
ing the strategic use of moral language in political discourse.
1.2  The role of generic frames in congress members’ tweets on the climate change
In addition to the moral foundations, generic frames of issues also play a distinct role in 
shaping public opinion and policy outcomes. Generic frames refer to emphasis frames that 
make certain aspects of an issue more salient than others, particularly those related to practi­
cality, cost, and self-interest (Slothuus and De Vreese 2010). These frames are instrumental 
in influencing how political issues are perceived, attributing causes and responsibilities, 
shaping the perceived importance of issues, and ultimately affecting policy decisions (Cac­
ciatore et al. 2016; McLeod et al. 2022). Their utility lies in their ability to connect complex 
issues, such as climate change, with everyday concerns and considerations, thereby making 
them more accessible and relevant to the general public.
Moral foundations of public discourse vary, depending on issues and contexts (e.g., see 
Graham et al. 2009; Wang and Inbar 2021; Frimer et al. 2017). In the realm of climate 
change discourse, the ways political parties frame the issue has profound implications for 
public opinion and policy preferences. Democratic and Republican administrations priori­
tize different concerns and aspects of the overall climate change issue (Klyza and Sousa 
2013). Specifically, Democrats tend to feature testimony from more pro-environment activ­
ists and mainstream scientists, whereas Republicans primarily report testimony from speak­
ers in the business and industrial sectors who argue against climate change regulation (Park 
et al. 2010).
In his 2009 study, Nisbet identified prevalent frameworks used by Democrats and 
Republicans to discuss climate change, highlighting a strategic division in their narrative 
approaches. Democratic leaders often employ frames like “Runaway Science,” which under­
score the imminent threat of climate change, and “Public Health,” spotlighting the negative 
impacts of climate change on environmental quality and public health. These narratives 
convey a unified message: the climate crisis affects us all, necessitating collective action 
against its dire consequences, such as increased infectious diseases, respiratory issues, and 
extreme weather events.
Conversely, Republican leaders favor frames like “Scientific Uncertainty,” suggesting 
climate change is an exaggeration or a manifestation of liberal alarmism, and “Middle Way,” 
advocating for bipartisan consensus and balancing economic and environmental interests 
through clean energy and national security enhancements. Additionally, the “Economic 
Consequences” frame emphasizes that climate policies would result in unfair burden on 
Americans in international climate agreements if other countries do not take similar actions, 
and the “Public Accountability” frame highlights that the government is prioritizing politics 
over climate change science. Nisbet’s compilation of these framing strategies, drawn from 
1 3
56 
Page 6 of 20


Climatic Change (2025) 178:56
academic articles, memos, and speeches from the 1990s and 2000s, offers a comprehensive 
and representative analysis widely cited in subsequent U.S. climate discourse research.
The different framing strategies highlight the divide in partisan interests. This diver­
gence reflects policy inclinations and is exacerbated by political polarization, where frames 
aligned with political identities resonate more with party constituents. Hence, we ask:
RQ2: How did framing patterns in social media discourse on climate change by Republi­
can and Democratic members evolve from the 111th to the 117th Congresses, reflecting 
ideological positions?
The two following hypotheses are proposed:
H3: Tweets by Republicans and Democrats will exhibit polarization in their use of generic 
frames, which are aligned with party interests.
H4: Polarization in climate change framing between tweets from Republicans and Demo­
crats will increase from 111th-114th to 115th −117th Congresses.2
Previous research has found that politicians from the minority party tend to use more moral 
language than those from the majority in the Congress (Wang and Inbar 2021). Specifically, 
Wang and Inbar (2021) observed that congressional Democrats used more moral language 
than congressional Republicans across all moral foundations, including binding founda­
tions, between 2016 and 2018. Notably, the differences increased after the election of Don­
ald Trump. Debates exist regarding whether incumbency and party positioning in Congress 
significantly affect the use of virtue and vice languages. Takikawa and Sakamoto (2020) 
argue that majority or minority status alone does not result in substantial differences in 
the use of moral languages. Moreover, other studies have shown that the broader political 
climate such as elections can amplify the use of moral language. For example, Sterling and 
Jost (2018) demonstrated that in times of policy shifts, both majority and minority parties 
might resort to moral language to justify their positions and criticize their opponents.
Environmental issues including climate change were traditionally seen as one of major 
concerns of the Democratic Party. Democratic congress members’ engagement in climate 
change issues remains stable, while the participation of Republicans tended to fluctuate 
over time, depending on presidential autonomy (DeGregorio 1998). Fisher and colleagues 
(2013a) showed that during the 110th Congress when Democrats were in the majority, only 
5% Republicans had climate change statements (p. 80). However, this number rose to 24% 
in the 109th Congress when Republicans controlled both the House and Senate. Mean­
while, between the two congresses, the percentages of climate change statements provided 
by Democrats changed only slightly.
Although participation of Republican members of Congress in climate change discourse 
has traditionally lagged, this may be changing. Though they still pursue a different climate 
agenda than Democrats, they appear more willing to consider climate policies than before. 
2 We treated congress 114th as a “critical juncture” of moral expression because during the the 114th con­
gress, the Republicans took both Houses—with the largest Republican majority since 1931. We also found 
the moral expression differs significantly before and after the 114th congress. The 114th congress was elected 
during the final two years of President Obama. From the 115th congress, President Trump and President 
Biden took office successively. The two time frames analyzed here (111th-114th congress, 115th-117th con­
gress) roughly cover the polarization in Obama and post-Obama eras.
1 3
Page 7 of 20 
56


Climatic Change (2025) 178:56
The 110th Congress saw an increasing diversity of actors supporting climate change legisla­
tion (Fisher et al. 2013b) and was successful in making efforts to address climate change 
and energy security through a joint agenda issued by members of both parties (Bang 2010). 
As a result, a range of hearings on climate change and energy security issues were held and 
several bills were introduced, many of which attained bipartisan sponsorship (US Senate 
2021). In the 116th Congress, Republicans sent out positive signals, as their engagement 
with the issue continued to evolve.
Finally, by examining moral foundations and generic frames together, we attempt to 
explore their dynamic interactions. By eliciting moral judgments, moral values can influ­
ence individuals’ receptiveness to various frames, guiding their attitudes and behaviors 
towards certain policies (Miles 2016). Therefore, in addition to mapping out patterns of 
moral language use and generic framing, this study will also examine how Congress mem­
bers’ use moral language to frame climate change, and how moral language is invoked 
across different generic frames.
RQ3: How does the use of moral language relate to the generic frames advocated by the 
Congress members, and how does this association vary across parties and evolve over 
time?
2  Materials and methods
This study examines hypotheses and research questions by analyzing archived tweets from 
members of the U.S. Congress. Our methodological approach is grounded in Critical Dis­
course Analysis (CDA), which suggests that the linguistic behavior is shaped by social 
affiliations and relationships (Fairclough 1995). Within the CDA framework, discourse is 
conceptualized as a social construct (Wodak and Meyer 2015), and texts are analyzed within 
their cultural and political contexts (Olausson 2009). This perspective allows linguistic anal­
ysis to serve as a powerful tool for examining the ideological processes that influence power 
dynamics and control mechanisms (Fowler and Kress 1979). In this study, we employed 
automated computational techniques for linguistic analysis to investigate both thematic 
(macro-level) and stylistic (micro-level) aspects of discourse (Olausson 2009). To analyze 
the ideological beliefs of Congress members and their moral foundations expressions and 
framing strategies in the political persuasion regarding climate change, we focused on their 
party identification, specifically their affiliation with political parties such as the Democrats 
or Republicans.
2.1  Data
Tweets were collected using the official Twitter Historical PowerTrack API. The inclusion 
criteria were as follows: (1) Tweets must contain at least one of five predetermined climate-
related keywords (climate, warming, green, energy, pollution); (2) Tweets must have been 
posted between January 1, 2009, and January 1, 2023, covering the tenure of the 111th 
to 117th Congresses; (3) Tweets must originate from verified accounts; (4) Only original 
tweets were considered, excluding replies and retweets; (5) Tweets must be in English. The 
raw data underwent preprocessing to retain only essential information, such as the creation 
1 3
56 
Page 8 of 20


Climatic Change (2025) 178:56
time, tweet ID, full text, and user ID. The unit of analysis was individual tweets, and each 
tweet was timestamped and matched with the corresponding Congress members in office 
during that period. The final dataset comprises 94,280 tweets, with 60,862 from Demo­
crats and 33,418 from Republicans. A comprehensive overview of the tweets is provided in 
Table 1.
2.2  Moral foundations assessment
Guided by Moral Foundations Theory (MFT), we applied the extended Moral Foundations 
Dictionary (eMFD) (Hopp et al. 2021) to assign virtue and vice probability scores to each 
tweet based on the five moral foundations (i.e., harm/care, fairness/reciprocity, ingroup/
loyalty, authority/respect, and purity/sanctity). The eMFD computes the morality values 
contained in a given text by referencing pre-established dictionaries. The creation of moral 
foundations dictionaries for textual content analysis has been proposed in previous studies 
(Graham and Haidt 2012; Frimer et al. 2017). Unlike previous manual selection methods for 
dictionary construction, the eMFD employs crowd-sourced annotations to ensure the lexi­
cons reflect context-specific human moral judgments. Consequently, the eMFD facilitates 
the calculation of morality scores for each tweet by comparing tweet content with lexicons 
in the ten-dimensional moral foundations dictionary.
2.3  Frame analysis
To analyze how Congress members frame climate change on Twitter, we employed a hybrid 
computer-assisted approach that integrates corpus linguistics techniques with deductive 
manual classification (Nicholls and Culpepper 2020). This approach began with identifying 
potential frames and associated framing devices through linguistic analysis (Koteyko et al. 
2010). We then proceeded to a deductive stage where elements were coded based on theory-
driven frameworks, and subsequently classified the original corpus using frame lexicons 
(Nicholls and Culpepper 2020). To identify the lexical prominence within the broad corpus, 
we initially extracted a list of keywords (Sinclair 1991; Baker et al. 2013) by comparing 
their frequency against the AmE06 reference corpus (Potts and Baker 2012), thereby isolat­
ing distinctive lexical elements of Congress members’ climate discourse on Twitter.
Using corpus linguistic techniques, we extracted the top 100 keywords, adhering to 
established norms to offer a representative overview of the corpus (Baker et al. 2013). In 
the subsequent qualitative categorization, we grouped these top 100 keywords into semanti­
cally coherent sets (Van Gorp 2007) and then deductively coded the semantic sets into six 
established frames of climate change discourse. Next, we conducted collocation analysis, 
Congress
Year
Total
Republican
Democrat
111th
2009–2011
3051
1183
1868
112th
2011–2013
7299
4744
2555
113th
2013–2015
9194
4406
4788
114th
2015–2017
9693
4269
5424
115th
2017–2019
13,807
2982
10,825
116th
2019–2021
23,546
5028
18,518
117th
2021–2023
27,690
10,806
16,884
Total
2009–2023
94,280
33,418
60,862
Table 1  Tweets overview
 
1 3
Page 9 of 20 
56


Climatic Change (2025) 178:56
which allowed us to establish terms relevant to the designated frames (Van Gorp 2010). 
We employed Mutual Information (MI) scores (Church and Hanks 1990) to determine the 
associative strength of keywords within a five-word proximity, with an MI score threshold 
of two. This analysis of collocational patterns revealed broader linguistic structures and 
contributed to the investigation of discourse framing. The resulting dictionaries for each 
generic frame, consisting of unigram lexicons comprising keywords and respective col­
locates, served as frame indicators as summarized in Supplementary Information file Table 
A1.
Lastly, we employed the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) methodology 
(Pennebaker et al. 2001) to align tweet content with established frame lexicons. This pro­
cess involved recording the count of words associated with each frame, calculating the 
proportional representation of each frame adjusted by tweet length, and determining the 
tweet’s primary frame by identifying the one with the greatest number of matched words. 
Tweets that did not correspond with any established frame were categorized under “Others.” 
AntConc (Anthony 2022) and Python programming facilitated keyword extraction, colloca­
tion analysis, and LIWC calculations, respectively.
Examples of tweets from both parties for each generic frame are provided in Supplemen­
tary Information Table A2. These examples were selected based on the highest LIWC scores 
within each frame, while also accounting for variations among Congress members to ensure 
a comprehensive overview. It is important to note that the frame analysis captures only the 
generic frames related to climate change. Within each frame, the partisan discourse can span 
the spectrum of moral foundations. For instance, the “Scientific Uncertainty” frame includes 
tweets asserting both “climate change is real” and “climate change is a hoax.”
3  Results
3.1  Moral foundations expression
We assessed the moral foundations alignment in climate-related tweets by Congress mem­
bers by employing the eMFD. A higher similarity score indicates a greater degree of moral 
alignment in the tweets analyzed. For clear demonstration, we calculated the mean similarity 
score for both individualizing values (care-virtue, care-vice, fairness-virtue, fairness-vice) 
and binding values (loyalty-virtue, loyalty-vice, authority-virtue, authority-vice, sanctity-
virtue, sanctity-vice), as well as separate aggregates for virtue (care-virtue, fairness-virtue, 
loyalty-virtue, authority-virtue, sanctity-virtue) and vice (care-vice, fairness-vice, loyalty-
vice, authority-vice, sanctity-vice) scores. Despite the conceptual debate surrounding the 
dichotomy of “individualizing versus binding values” (e.g. Graham et al. 2011), these cat­
egories are commonly utilized in moral foundations research. We adopted this framework 
to enhance the interpretability of our findings.
The results challenge H1; the analysis revealed that both Democrats and Republicans 
predominantly use individualizing values in climate change discourse, with less emphasis 
on binding values. Contrary to H2, Democratic discourse is more frequently associated 
with vice-related words, while Republican tweets show a slight preference for virtue-related 
terms. Figure 1 illustrates these patterns, enhancing our understanding of the moral linguis­
tic strategies in political discourse.
1 3
56 
Page 10 of 20


Climatic Change (2025) 178:56
We employed mixed-effects models to validate the partisan difference in the expression 
of moral foundations. To account for nonindependence of tweets authored by the same indi­
vidual and across different congressional sessions, we included random intercepts for both 
congress members and congressional sessions in the model. Separate models were built for 
each of the four types of moral foundation expressions: individualizing, binding, virtue, and 
vice.
To measure effect sizes, we standardized the moral foundation expression scores, enabling 
the coefficients to represent the difference in scores between Democrats and Republicans in 
standard deviations (Lorah 2018). As shown in Table 2, our analyses revealed that Demo­
crats were more likely than Republicans to use language associated with both individual­
izing values (b = 0.15, t [2592.1] = 12.1, p < 0.001) and binding values (b = 0.10, t [2431.1
] = 8.84, p < 0.001). The most pronounced partisan difference emerged in the use of vice-
related terms, with Democrats exhibiting a significantly higher frequency (b = 0.22, t [296
0.8] = 14.73, p < 0.001) compared to Republicans. In contrast, Republicans demonstrated a 
slight yet significant tendency to use virtue-related language (b = −0.03, t [2847.7] = −1.97, 
p < 0.05). To further substantiate our findings, a detailed analysis of partisan moral founda­
tions, including moral values and moral language use, is provided in Supplementary Infor­
mation (Table A3-A4).
This pattern indicates that political elites from both parties frequently incorporated indi­
vidualizing values into their climate change communications, with Democrats showing a 
stronger inclination to do so. The results confirm that Democrats were more likely than 
Republicans to utilize both individualizing (b = 0.15) and binding (b = 0.10) values. Further­
more, the difference in effect sizes highlights the practical significance of these rhetorical 
strategies. Democrats tended to use more negative (vice-related) terminology (b = 0.22), 
whereas Republicans favored positive (virtue-related) language (b = −0.03). This suggests 
that Democrats are more likely to employ assertive, negative language to emphasize the 
urgency of climate action.
b
SE
df
t-value
p
Individualizing
.15
.01
2592.1
12.1
***
Binding
.10
.01
2431.1
8.84
***
Virtue
-.03
.01
2847.7
−1.97
*
Vice
.22
.02
2960.8
14.73
***
Party affiliation is coded such that 0 = Republican (N = 33,418) and 
1 = Democrat (N = 60,862). Degrees of freedom are by Satterthwaite 
approximation. *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001
Table 2  Mixed effect models 
with random intercepts for con­
gress members and congresses 
of partisan moral foundation 
expression
 
Fig. 1  Comparison of moral foundation expression by republicans and democrats
 
1 3
Page 11 of 20 
56


Climatic Change (2025) 178:56
3.2  Partisan frame polarization
H3 posits that partisan differences in climate change framing will not only polarize but also 
align closely with each party’s respective political agenda. To test this hypothesis, a series 
of chi-square tests were performed. To address the nonindependence in the dataset resulting 
from the clustering of political affiliation, we applied within-cluster resampling using a boot­
strapping approach. The use of bootstrapping, which involves sampling with replacement, is 
well-supported for generating confidence intervals for range statistics when the number of 
realizations is sufficient to obtain reliable statistics (Davison and Hinkley 1997). Previous 
studies have validated the use of bootstrap techniques with 1,000 iterations to mitigate the 
effects of biased variance estimation (Ogunbode et al. 2017). Specifically, we used stratified 
sampling for the bootstrap method, randomly selecting one observation from each cluster to 
form a new dataset. This process was repeated 1,000 times to generate multiple new datasets, 
enabling the estimation of effects. Table 3 details the frequency, count, and significant value 
of six generic frames utilized by Republicans and Democrats in their climate change Twit­
ter discourse. The analysis reveals that Republicans significantly favored the “Middle Way” 
frame more than Democrats (chi-square (1, N = 20261) = 5166.362, Phi = −0.234, p < 0.001), 
while Democrats showed a stronger preference for the “Runaway Science” frame compared 
to Republicans (chi-square (1, N = 11889) = 3885.087, Phi = 0.203, p < 0.001). Moreover, 
the “Economic Consequence” frame emerged as the most prevalent overall, accounting 
for 31.2% of all frames (N = 29,458). Republicans were more likely to use this frame than 
Democrats, although the effect size was smaller (Phi = −0.116, p < 0.001), indicating a less 
pronounced partisan difference compared to the “Middle Way” frame. In summary, a polar­
ized pattern of frame usage emerged: Democrats frequently invoked the “Runaway Science” 
frame (Phi = 0.203) to emphasize the urgency of climate change and advocate for collective 
action, while Republicans predominantly relied on the “Middle Way” frame (Phi = −0.234), 
focusing on alternative solutions (H3).
H4 states the polarization of partisan climate change framing will increase over the time 
period we examined. We constructed a log frequency ratio plot for each of six frames, 
comparing Republican to Democratic usage, with the background color coded in blue and 
red. The horizontal axis indicates frame preference, with leftward positions denoting Demo­
cratic dominance and rightward positions denoting Republican dominance. The size of each 
frame's circle is proportional to its overall prevalence among the six frames considered. Fig­
Table 3  Chi-square test of partisan frame usage with bootstrap of stratified sampling from congress members 
and congresses
Total
Republican
Democrat
Chi-square
Phi
p
%
n
%
n
%
n
Economic Consequence
31.2
29,458
13.7
12,872
17.6
16,586
1274.6
-.116
***
Middle Way
21.5
20,261
12.2
11,518
9.3
8743
5166.4
-.234
***
Public Health
20.9
19,701
4.9
4602
16
15,099
1590
.13
***
Runaway Science
12.6
11,889
1.2
1175
11.4
10,714
3885.1
.203
***
Scientific Uncertainty
10.5
9867
2
1891
8.5
7976
1276.6
.116
***
Public Accountability
1
902
0.5
435
0.5
467
65.013
-.026
***
*p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001
1 3
56 
Page 12 of 20


Climatic Change (2025) 178:56
ure 2 illustrates these distributions across two periods: the 111th-114th and the 115th-117th 
Congresses. Additional chi-square tests with within-cluster resampling were conducted to 
assess framing shifts across these periods, with results detailed in Supplementary Informa­
tion, Table A5-A6. The detailed SPSS outputs can be found in the Supplementary Informa­
tion File 2.
By scrutinizing the frame variation longitudinally, we observe a heightened polarization 
in the climate change discourse between Democrats and Republicans. During the 115th-
117th congresses, both parties frequently employed distinct frames, with Democrats often 
emphasizing the “Runaway Science” frame, while Republicans placed greater emphasis on 
the “Middle Way” frame. In contrast, during the 111th-114th congresses, the two parties 
adopted more common frames, suggesting a closer alignment in their climate change nar­
ratives of both parties during the earlier period. These observations lend empirical support 
to H4, suggesting a trend toward increased polarization in partisan discourse from the 111th 
through the 117th congresses, and a growing ideological divide in their respective climate 
change outlooks.
In our subsequent analysis, we explored the relationship between framing and moral 
language usage in Congress members’ climate change Twitter discourse, focusing on how 
this association varied across parties and over time. Specifically, we traced the evolution 
of moral language, categorized as virtue and vice (reflective of positive and negative atti­
tudes) within each climate change frame. Our goal was to quantify changes in the use of 
moral language over time, considering the relationship with political party affliation and 
presidential incumbency. As depicted in Fig. 3, the x-axis represents the corresponding year, 
while the y-axis denotes the divergence between virtue and vice language—positive values 
indicating virtue, negative values indicating vice. Overall, we observed a notable variation 
in the deployment of moral language across different frames, with both Democrats and 
Republicans tending to use similar levels of virtue and vice languages. Specifically, the 
Fig. 2  Comparison of partisan frame usage between 111th-114th and 115th-117th congresses
 
1 3
Page 13 of 20 
56


Climatic Change (2025) 178:56
application of moral languages varied considerably depending on the frame being consid­
ered, regardless of party affiliation. Closer examination revealed that positive attitudes were 
more prevalent in the “Middle Way” frame, while negative attitudes were more pronounced 
in the “Runaway Science” frame for both parties.
To further validate our findings, we conducted hierarchical regression (Supplementary 
Information Table A7) and double moderation analyses (Supplementary Information Table 
A8(a) to (d)) to examine the relationships among the six frames, moral values and the the 
use of moral language in the context of climate change discourse. These analytical methods 
were designed to evaluate the interplay between framing effects, moral foundations, and 
political variables in climate change communication. It is important to note that the analysis 
does not imply causal effects but instead highlights the associations between moral founda­
tions, partisanship, incumbency, and framing.
4  Discussion
This study delved into the 111th to 117th U.S. Congress members' Twitter posts on climate 
change, uncovering the nuanced relationship between moral expressions, political ideology, 
and issue framing. Through MFT-based computational analysis, we quantitatively assessed 
the prevalence of individualizing versus binding values among Congress members and the 
emphasis on moral language use (i.e. vices vs. virtues) of Democrats and Republicans. Criti­
cal discourse analysis was further used to examine the sociolinguistic characteristics of 
tweets from Congress members, focusing on the partisan polarization of climate change 
over time, and the relationships between moral foundation profiles, issue frames, and politi­
cal ideology. This multifaceted approach allows us to uncover the dynamic nature of politi­
cal communication about climate change, highlighting not just the content but the frequency 
and context in which these moral expressions were made. Our research investigates the 
bipartisan preferences for climate change framing and moral language, uncovering the intri­
Fig. 3  Partisan virtue and vice moral language usage for each frame over time. Note. The x-axis is the cor­
responding year, the y-axis is the divergence of mean similarity score between virtue and vice. The shaded 
areas correspond to the political party of the president incumbency, with blue representing the Democratic 
Party and red representing the Republican Party
 
1 3
56 
Page 14 of 20


Climatic Change (2025) 178:56
cate relationship between generic frames and moral foundations. The findings suggest the 
potential for collective action across the political spectrum.
First, our findings reveal a bipartisan tendency towards individualizing moral values, 
emphasizing principles of care and fairness. This result challenges the traditional narra­
tive of a stark moral divide between political parties (Haidt and Graham 2007; Graham et 
al. 2009; Sterling and Jost 2018), suggesting a complex interplay of values. Additionally, 
Democrats tended to use language associated with vice-related terms, while Republicans 
preferred virtue-related language. This reflects Democrats’ strategic use of moral conta­
gion—where social media can amplify moral outrage messages—to underscore the moral 
stakes in climate action (Brady and Crockett 2019; Brady et al. 2019). These insights sug­
gest that the rhetorical strategies employed by elites from both parties play a crucial role 
in framing the climate change, thus having the potential to impact public discourse and to 
influence policy debates and public opinion on climate change.
Second, both parties appeared to sustain their longstanding positions on climate change, 
as partisan framing strategies generally appeared to align with the agendas of the respective 
parties. Democrats continued to advocate for timely climate change action, as they tended 
to employ the “Runaway Science” frame to emphasize the exigency of climate change and 
the need for immediate action. Meanwhile, Republicans consistently cast doubts on the real 
impacts of climate change and highlighted the economic costs of pursuing environmental 
regulations, while opting for the “Middle Way” frame to advocate more balanced or recon­
ciliatory solutions.
Third, we identified clear partisan divides in framing climate change through a series 
of chi-square tests. This polarization has intensified over time, from the 111th to the 117th 
congresses. Nonetheless, we have also noted areas where common ground might be found. 
Although Republicans’ participation in climate change discourse has traditionally lagged, 
this may be changing. Specifically, Republicans have also supported pro-environmental 
development through the “Middle Way” approach that advocates clean energy technologies 
like nuclear, storage, geothermal and carbon capture, as well as legislations for emission 
mitigation and clean energy.
Fourth, our study shows that the use of moral language (vice vs. virtue) was associated 
with climate change frames; by contrast, the effects of partisanship and presidential incum­
bency on this association were relatively minor. For example, a “Middle Way” framing may 
highlight virtue values to encourage participation in collective action, and conversely, vice 
words may be used in the “Runaway Science” frame to deter public engagement (Moser 
2007; Wlodarczyk et al. 2017; Markowitz and Shariff 2012). This insight contributes to 
a deeper understanding of the complexities in the communication strategies employed by 
Democrats and Republicans, particularly regarding the use of moral language within spe­
cific frames.
Fifth, our findings offer a counterpoint to the traditional view that moral values align 
strictly with partisan ideologies by suggesting that moral considerations in climate discus­
sions are more topic-specific and dynamic than previously thought. As mentioned above, 
our analysis indicates that specific issue frames are more strongly associated with the use 
of moral language than party affiliation in the climate change debate, with the influence 
of party affiliation and presidential incumbency being comparatively minor. This suggests 
the potential for “ideological symmetry in moral motives,” where both parties may frame 
climate issues in ways that resonate with their moral values—Democrats may frame climate 
1 3
Page 15 of 20 
56


Climatic Change (2025) 178:56
action as a “sacred” duty, while Republicans might highlight “fairness” in economic devel­
opment and corporate rights (Frimer et al. 2017, p.33).
Our research suggests that engaging in climate discussions through shared moral values 
could foster bipartisan dialogue and support for pro-environment policies. The flexibility in 
moral foundations observed among Democrats and Republicans indicates that moral values, 
far from being static ideological markers, are dynamically employed by politicians to navi­
gate the complex terrain of political and social identity. This adaptability in moral rhetoric 
could serve as a potent tool in bridging ideological divides, particularly in the context of the 
ongoing “culture war.” The idea that both parties can frame climate issues in morally reso­
nant ways—whether as a sacred duty to protect the environment or as a matter of fairness in 
economic development—suggests that moral foundations can offer a pathway to bipartisan 
consensus and action.
To the extent that Congress members act as opinion leaders and play a key role in cor­
recting misinformation for the public, our findings have important implications for climate 
change policy and particularly for issue advocacy. Divided elite cues may activate the par­
tisan identity of voters, much to the detriment of issues like climate change where citizens 
might otherwise find common ground. Morality can function as a strong motivating factor in 
potentially moving beyond the partisan divide to reach a level of general consensus.
In addition, our findings indicate that when it comes to climate issues, these elites’ use 
of moral language can change over time with the rise and fall in parties’ political power. As 
such, future scholarly endeavors should be wary of the limitations of a static conception of 
moral claims around climate issues. As Democrats and Republicans may use different moral 
language in climate discourse in response to different circumstances, a more dynamic view 
of moral language use will likely be more instructive.
5  Conclusion
This study represents a preliminary effort to apply a combination of computational text 
analysis and critical discourse analysis to examine moral foundations in climate change dis­
cussions. Our findings reveal that, despite the partisan divide surrounding climate change, 
both Democrats and Republicans converge in moral values and the moral language use 
related to climate issues. Interestingly, Republicans are moving away from outright denial 
of climate change towards a more reconcilable “Middle Way” to this contentious issue. 
This shift challenges the prevailing conception that political opinions on climate change in 
the U.S. are irreconcilably polarized, highlighting several practical approaches for bridging 
the partisan divide. First, pro-environmental advocates can underscore the new economic 
opportunities (e.g., in clean energy industries) that climate actions may generate to engage 
political conservatives. Second, given the shared pattern of moral communication concern­
ing the climate issues, promoting bipartisan dialogue on climate actions is crucial to uniting 
leaders and citizens across the partisan divide. The findings from this study offer a glimmer 
of hope for collective action against climate change in the U.S.
It is important to recognize several limitations of the present study. First, our analysis is 
primarily based on Twitter data due to limitations in data availability. Future studies may 
incorporate social media data from other platforms for a more comprehensive examination 
of Congress members’ persuasion strategies on climate change. Comparative studies that 
1 3
56 
Page 16 of 20


Climatic Change (2025) 178:56
examine their online expressions vis-à-vis those of average users will also help map out the 
broader landscape of climate change discourses as well as the different underlying motiva­
tions for content production. Second, our study focuses on the specific issue of climate 
change. Future research could explore other morally contentious issues or politically divi­
sive topics such as immigration, healthcare, and gun control. Third, there remains room for 
the further validation of our findings on the interaction between generic frames and moral 
foundations in other national contexts. We believe that exploring the dynamics underlying 
moral communication, generic frames, and partisanship for these and other contested issues 
could provide a more thorough understanding of morally infused persuasion strategies by 
political elites—and where common ground may be found.
Supplementary information  The online version contains supplementary material available at ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​
/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​0​5​8​4​-​0​2​5​-​0​3​8​9​8​-​4​.​
Author contributions  Study conception and design was contributed by Yunya Song, Jonathon P Schuldt 
and Y Connie Yuan. Material preparation, data collection and analysis were performed by Ziwei Wang and 
Jun Li. The first draft of the manuscript was written by Yunya Song, Ziwei Wang, Jun Li and Sheng Zou. 
The revision of the manuscript was done by Yin Zhang. All authors commented on previous versions of the 
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Funding  Open access funding provided by Hong Kong Baptist University Library
This study was supported by Humanities and Social Sciences Prestigious Fellowship Scheme (32000921) of 
Research Grants Council of Hong Kong.
Data availability  The data underlying this article will be shared on reasonable request to the corresponding 
author.
Declarations
Competing interests  The authors report there are no competing interests to declare.
Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons 
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. 
If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted 
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Anderson S, De Golia A, Potoski M (2013) Framing effects on environmental politics and policy. UCSB 
Environ Polit Pol Conf 1–10. Available from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​c​s​s​e​p​.​p​o​l​s​c​i​.​u​c​s​b​.​e​d​u​/​s​i​t​e​s​/​s​e​c​u​r​e​.​l​s​i​t​.​u​c​s​b​.​e​d​u​.​p​o​l​
i​.​d​7​_​c​s​s​e​p​/​f​i​l​e​s​/​s​i​t​e​f​i​l​e​s​/​c​o​n​f​e​r​e​n​c​e​p​a​p​e​r​s​/​M​o​r​a​l​%​2​0​F​r​a​m​i​n​g​%​2​0​A​n​d​e​r​s​o​n​%​2​C​%​2​0​D​e​G​o​l​i​a​%​2​C​%​2​
0​P​o​t​o​s​k​i​.​p​d​f. Accessed 22 Mar 2024
Andrews TM, Smirnov O (2020) Who feels the impacts of climate change? Glob Environ Chang 65:102164. ​
h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​g​l​o​e​n​v​c​h​a​.​2​0​2​0​.​1​0​2​1​6​4
Anthony L (2022) AntConc (Version 4.2.0). Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan. Available from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​l​
a​u​r​e​n​c​e​a​n​t​h​o​n​y​.​n​e​t​/​s​o​f​t​w​a​r​e​. Accessed 22 Mar 2024
Baker P, Gabrielatos C, McEnery T (2013) Sketching Muslims: a corpus driven analysis of representations 
around the word “Muslim” in the British press 1998–2009. Appl Linguis 34(3):255–278. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​
g​/​1​0​.​1​0​9​3​/​a​p​p​l​i​n​/​a​m​s​0​4​8​
1 3
Page 17 of 20 
56


Climatic Change (2025) 178:56
Bang G (2010) Energy security and climate change concerns: Triggers for energy policy change in the United 
States? Energy Policy 38(4):1645–1653. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2009.01.045
Brady WJ, Crockett MJ (2019) How effective is online outrage? Trends Cogn Sci 23(2):79–80. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​
r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​t​i​c​s​.​2​0​1​8​.​1​1​.​0​0​4​
Brady WJ, Wills JA, Burkart D, Jost JT, Van Bavel JJ (2019) An ideological asymmetry in the diffusion of 
moralized content on social media among political leaders. J Exp Psychol Gen 148(10):1802–1813. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000532
Cacciatore MA, Scheufele DA, Iyengar S (2016) The end of framing as we know it… and the future of media 
effects. Mass Commun Soc 19(1):7–23. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​8​0​/​1​5​2​0​5​4​3​6​.​2​0​1​5​.​1​0​6​8​8​1​1
Caprara GV, Schwartz S, Capanna C, Vecchione M, Barbaranelli C (2006) Personality and politics: values, 
traits, and political choice. Polit Psychol 27(1):1–28. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​1​1​/​j​.​1​4​6​7​-​9​2​2​1​.​2​0​0​6​.​0​0​4​4​7​.​x
Church KW, Hanks P (1990) Word association norms, mutual information, and lexicography. Comput Ling 
- Assoc Comput Ling 16(1):22–29
Clifford S, Jerit J (2013) How words do the work of politics: moral foundations theory and the debate over 
stem cell research. J Polit 75(3):659–671. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022381613000492
Currie S, Choma B (2018) Sociopolitical ideology and the morality of green behaviour. Environ Polit 
27(2):247–266. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​8​0​/​0​9​6​4​4​0​1​6​.​2​0​1​7​.​1​4​1​3​7​2​7
Davison AC, Hinkley DV (1997) Bootstrap methods and their application. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge
Day MV, Fiske ST, Downing EL, Trail TE (2014) Shifting liberal and conservative attitudes using moral foun­
dations theory. Pers Soc Psychol Bull 40(12):1559–1573. https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167214551152
De Gregorio C (1998) Assets and access: linking lobbyists and lawmakers in congress. In: Herrnson PS, 
Shaiko RG, Wilcox C (eds) The interest group connection: electioneering, lobbying, and policymaking 
in Washington. Chatham House Publishers, Chatham, p viii, p 376
Diakopoulos N, Zhang A, Elgesem D, Salway A (2014) Identifying and analyzing moral evaluation frames 
in climate change blog discourse. Proc Int AAAI Conf Weblogs Soc Media 8(1):583–586. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​
r​g​/​1​0​.​1​6​0​9​/​i​c​w​s​m​.​v​8​i​1​.​1​4​5​7​0​
Dickinson JL, McLeod P, Bloomfield R, Allred S (2016) Which moral foundations predict willingness to 
make lifestyle changes to avert climate change in the USA? PLoS ONE 11(10):e0163852. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​
r​g​/​1​0​.​1​3​7​1​/​j​o​u​r​n​a​l​.​p​o​n​e​.​0​1​6​3​8​5​2​
Fairclough N (1995) Critical discourse analysis. Longman, London
Feinberg M, Willer R (2013) The moral roots of environmental attitudes. Psychol Sci 24(1):56–62. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​
o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​7​7​/​0​9​5​6​7​9​7​6​1​2​4​4​9​1​7​7​
Fisher DR, Waggle J, Leifeld P (2013a) Where does political polarization come from? locating polarization 
within the US climate change debate. Am Behav Sci 57(1):70–92. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​7​7​/​0​0​0​2​7​6​4​2​1​
2​4​6​3​3​6​0​
Fisher DR, Leifeld P, Iwaki Y (2013b) Mapping the ideological networks of American climate politics. Clim 
Change 116(3):523–545. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-012-0512-7
Fiske AP, Rai TS (2014) Virtuous violence: Hurting and killing to create, sustain, end, and honor social rela­
tionships. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Fowler R, Kress G (1979) Critical linguistics. In: Language and control, 1st ed, vol 2. Routledge, London, pp 
185–213. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429436215-10
Frimer JA, Tell CE, Motyl M (2017) Sacralizing liberals and fair-minded conservatives: ideological sym­
metry in the moral motives in the culture war. Anal Soc Issues Public Policy 17(1):33–59. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​
r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​1​1​/​a​s​a​p​.​1​2​1​2​7​
Fulgoni GM, Lipsman A, Davidsen C (2016) The power of political advertising: lessons for practitioners: 
how data analytics, social media, and creative strategies shape U.S. Presidential election campaigns. J 
Advert Res 56(3):239–244. https://doi.org/10.2501/JAR-2016-034
Graham J, Haidt J (2012) Sacred values and evil adversaries: A moral foundations approach. In: Shaver P, 
Mikulincer M (eds) The social psychology of morality: Exploring the causes of good and evil. American 
Psychological Association Books, New York, pp 11–31
Graham J, Haidt J, Nosek BA (2009) Liberals and conservatives rely on different sets of moral foundations. 
J Pers Soc Psychol 96(5):1029–1046. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0015141
Graham J, Nosek BA, Haidt J, Iyer R, Koleva S, Ditto PH (2011) Mapping the moral domain. J Pers Soc 
Psychol 101:366–385. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0021847
Haidt J, Graham J (2007) When morality opposes justice: conservatives have moral intuitions that liberals 
may not recognize. Soc Justice Res 20(1):98–116. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11211-007-0034-z
Hopp FR, Fisher JT, Cornell D, Huskey R, Weber R (2021) The extended moral foundations dictionary 
(eMFD): development and applications of a crowd-sourced approach to extracting moral intuitions 
from text. Behav Res Methods 53(1):232–246. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-020-01433-0
1 3
56 
Page 18 of 20


Climatic Change (2025) 178:56
Hurst K, Stern MJ (2020) Messaging for environmental action: the role of moral framing and message source. 
J Environ Psychol 68:101394. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2020.101394
Jones KL, Noorbaloochi S, Jost JT, Bonneau R, Nagler J, Tucker JA (2018) Liberal and conservative values: 
what we can learn from congressional tweets. Polit Psychol 39(2):423–443. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​1​1​/​p​
o​p​s​.​1​2​4​1​5​
Klyza CM, Sousa DJ (2013) American environmental policy: beyond gridlock (Updated and expanded ed.). 
The MIT Press, Cambridge
Koteyko N, Thelwall M, Nerlich B (2010) From carbon markets to carbon morality: creative compounds as 
framing devices in online discourses on climate change mitigation. Sci Commun 32(1):25–54. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​
o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​7​7​/​1​0​7​5​5​4​7​0​0​9​3​4​0​4​2​1​
Kugler M, Jost JT, Noorbaloochi S (2014) Another look at moral foundations theory: do authoritarianism and 
social dominance orientation explain liberal-conservative differences in “Moral” Intuitions? Soc Justice 
Res 27(4):413–431. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11211-014-0223-5
Lorah J (2018) Effect size measures for multilevel models: definition, interpretation, and TIMSS example. 
Large-Scale Assess Educ 6(1):1–11. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40536-018-0061-2
Markowitz EM (2012) Is climate change an ethical issue? examining young adults’ beliefs about climate and 
morality. Clim Change 114(3–4):479–495. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-012-0422-8
Markowitz EM, Shariff AF (2012) Climate change and moral judgement. Nat Clim Chang 2(4):243–247. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate1378
McCright AM, Dunlap RE (2011) The politicization of climate change and polarization in the american 
public’s views of global warming, 2001–2010. Sociol Quart 52(2):155–194. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​1​1​/​j​.​1​
5​3​3​-​8​5​2​5​.​2​0​1​1​.​0​1​1​9​8​.​x
McLeod DM, Choung H, Su M-H, Kim S-J, Tao R, Liu J, Lee B (2022) Navigating a diverse paradigm: a 
conceptual framework for experimental framing effects research. Rev Commun Res 10:1. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​
r​g​/​1​0​.​1​2​8​4​0​/​I​S​S​N​.​2​2​5​5​-​4​1​6​5​.​0​3​3​
Miles MR (2016) Presidential appeals to moral foundations: how modern presidents persuade cross-ideo­
logues. Policy Stud J 44(4):471–490. https://doi.org/10.1111/psj.12151
Moser SC (2007) More bad news: the risk of neglecting emotional responses to climate change information. 
In: Dilling L, Moser SC (eds) Creating a climate for change. Cambridge University Press,Cambridge, 
pp 64–80. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511535871.006
Neiman JL, Gonzalez FK, Wilkinson K, Smith KB, Hibbing JR (2016) Speaking different languages or 
reading from the same script? word usage of democratic and republican politicians. Polit Commun 
33(2):346–349. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​8​0​/​1​0​5​8​4​6​0​9​.​2​0​1​6​.​1​1​6​1​3​4​9
Nicholls T, Culpepper PD (2020) Computational identification of media frames: Strengths, weaknesses, and 
opportunities. Polit Commun 1–23. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​8​0​/​1​0​5​8​4​6​0​9​.​2​0​2​0​.​1​8​1​2​7​7​7
Nisbet MC (2009) Communicating climate change: why frames matter for public engagement. Environ Sci 
Policy Sustain Dev 51(2):12–23. https://doi.org/10.3200/ENVT.51.2.12-23
Ogunbode CA, Liu Y, Tausch N (2017) The moderating role of political affiliation in the link between flood­
ing experience and preparedness to reduce energy use. Clim Change 145(3–4):445–458. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​
/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​0​5​8​4​-​0​1​7​-​2​0​8​9​-​7​
Olausson U (2009) Global warming—global responsibility? Media frames of collective action and scientific 
certainty. Pub Underst Sci 18(4):421–436. https://doi.org/10.1177/0963662507081242
Park HS, Liu X, Vedlitz A (2010) Framing climate policy debates: science, network, and US Congress, 
1976–2007. Conference Proceedings of the Policy Networks Conference 2010. Available from ​h​t​t​p​:​/​/​o​
p​e​n​s​i​u​c​.​l​i​b​.​s​i​u​.​e​d​u​/​p​n​c​o​n​f​s​_​2​0​1​0​/​4​1​. Accessed 22 Mar 2024
Pennebaker JW, Francis ME, Booth RJ (2001) Linguistic inquiry and word count: LIWC 2001. Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates, Mahway 71(2001):2001
Potts A, Baker P (2012) Does semantic tagging identify cultural change in british and american english? Int 
J Corpus Linguist 17(3):295–324. https://doi.org/10.1075/ijcl.17.3.01pot
Ryan TJ (2014) Reconsidering moral issues in politics. J Polit 76(2):380–397. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​7​/​S​0​0​2​
2​3​8​1​6​1​3​0​0​1​3​5​7​
Sagi E, Dehghani M (2014) Measuring moral rhetoric in text. Soc Sci Comput Rev 32(2):132–144. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​
o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​7​7​/​0​8​9​4​4​3​9​3​1​3​5​0​6​8​3​7​
Salomon E, Preston JL, Tannenbaum MB (2017) Climate change helplessness and the (De)moralization of 
individual energy behavior. J Exp Psychol Appl 23(1):15–28. https://doi.org/10.1037/xap0000105
Sinclair J (1991) Corpus, concordance, collocation. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Skitka LJ, Bauman CW (2008) Moral conviction and political engagement. Polit Psychol 29(1):29–54. ​h​t​t​p​s​
:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​1​1​/​j​.​1​4​6​7​-​9​2​2​1​.​2​0​0​7​.​0​0​6​1​1​.​x
Slothuus R, de Vreese CH (2010) Political parties, motivated reasoning, and issue framing effects. J Polit 
72(3):630–645. https://doi.org/10.1017/S002238161000006X
1 3
Page 19 of 20 
56


Climatic Change (2025) 178:56
Sterling J, Jost JT (2018) Moral discourse in the twitterverse: effects of ideology and political sophistication 
on language use among U.S. citizens and members of congress. J Lang Polit 17(2):195–221. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​
i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​7​5​/​j​l​p​.​1​7​0​3​4​.​s​t​e​
Takikawa H, Sakamoto T (2020) The moral–emotional foundations of political discourse: a comparative 
analysis of the speech records of the U.S. and the Japanese legislatures. Qual Quant 54(2):547–566. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-019-00912-7
U.S. Senate: Cloture Motions - 110th Congress (2021). Retrieved 3 November 2021, from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​s​e​n​a​
t​e​.​g​o​v​/​l​e​g​i​s​l​a​t​i​v​e​/​c​l​o​t​u​r​e​/​1​1​0​.​h​t​m
Vainio A, Mäkiniemi J-P (2016) How Are Moral Foundations Associated with Climate-Friendly Consump­
tion? J Agric Environ Ethics 29(2):265–283. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10806-016-9601-3
Van Gorp B (2007) The constructionist approach to framing: bringing culture back in. J Commun 57(1):60–
78. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​1​1​/​j​.​1​4​6​0​-​2​4​6​6​.​2​0​0​6​.​0​0​3​2​9​.​x
Van Gorp B (2010) Strategies to take subjectivity out of framing analysis. In: D’Angelo P, Kuypers JA (eds) 
Doing news framing analysis. Routledge, London, pp 100–125
Van Leeuwen F, Park JH (2009) Perceptions of social dangers, moral foundations, and political orientation. 
Pers Individ Differ 47(3):169–173. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2009.02.017
Wang S-YN, Inbar Y (2021) Moral-language use by U.S. political elites. Psychol Sci 32(1):14–26. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​
o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​7​7​/​0​9​5​6​7​9​7​6​2​0​9​6​0​3​9​7​
Wetts R (2020) Models and morals: elite-oriented and value-neutral discourse dominates american organi­
zations’ framings of climate change. Soc Forces 98(3):1339–1369. https://doi.org/10.1093/sf/soz027
Wlodarczyk A, Basabe N, Páez D, Zumeta L (2017) Hope and anger as mediators between collective action 
frames and participation in collective mobilization: the case of 15-M. J Soc Polit Psychol 5(1):200–223. 
https://doi.org/10.5964/jspp.v5i1.471
Wodak R, Meyer M (eds) (2015) Methods of critical discourse studies. Sage, London
Wolsko C, Ariceaga H, Seiden J (2016) Red, white, and blue enough to be green: effects of moral framing 
on climate change attitudes and conservation behaviors. J Exp Soc Psychol 65:7–19. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​
.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​j​e​s​p​.​2​0​1​6​.​0​2​.​0​0​5​
Zhou J (2016) Boomerangs versus javelins: how polarization constrains communication on climate change. 
Environ Polit 25(5):788–811. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​8​0​/​0​9​6​4​4​0​1​6​.​2​0​1​6​.​1​1​6​6​6​0​2
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
1 3
56 
Page 20 of 20
